-----------------------------------------------------------------
Thursday, August 9, 1990             Audio Service:  202/755-1788
----------------------------------------------------------------
This is NASA Headline News for Thursday, August 9........

The Hubble Space Telescope Investigation Board reports the 
analyses of the possible causes of the observed spherical 
aberration in the HST suggest that the "reflective null 
corrector" may have been flawed.  The reflective null corrector 
is an optical reference device which was used to measure very 
precisely the surface figure of the HST primary mirror during its 
manufacture.  The Investigation Board is scheduled to meet at 
HDOS on August 15 and 16 to review the test procedures and 
resulting data.
                            ********

The Space Shuttle Atlantis has been rolled back from launch pad 
39A and is now at the Vehicle Assembly Building.  Following the 
Atlantis arrival, crews were given the go-ahead to move the Space 
Shuttle Columbia out to the pad.  Columbia is expected to arrive 
at the pad at noon today.
                            ********

Engineers are keeping a 24-hour watch on the Magellan 
Spacecraft.  It is now 519,095 miles from Venus.  The command to 
arm the solid rocket motor in preparation for Venus orbit 
insertion tomorrow was successfully sent to the spacecraft.  The 
Magellan will continue the remainder of the Venus orbit insertion 
sequence autonomously under control of its onboard computers.

                            ********

The current Soviet crew aboard the Mir Space Station are 
scheduled to change guard today as the new crew was successfully 
launched to the orbiting space station.  According to UPI, the 
launch was observed by two Tokyo broadcasting station 
correspondents, one of whom will become the first Journalist, as 
well as the first Japanese, in space.

                            ********

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 
spokesman reported yesterday that the lone functioning 
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) can be 
kept working until late 1993, according to AEROSPACE DAILY.  He 
is reported to say this is almost two years after the scheduled 
launch date for its next-generation replacement.  

                            ********

The first organizational meeting of the Advisory Committee on the 
Future of the U.S. Space Program, under the Chairmanship of 
Norman R. Augustine, is scheduled to be held August 16.






---------------------------------------------------------------
Here's the broadcast schedule for Public Affairs events on NASA 
Select TV.  All times are Eastern.


Thursday, August 9.....
            11:30 A.M.     NASA Update will be transmitted.
            12:00 P.M.     NASA Video Productions:
                           Life in the Universe Program:
                           "Gemini Science Program"
            12:30 P.M.     Back Space Series.
           1-3:00 P.M.     Magellan Pre-Venus Orbit Insertion
                           News Conference held at JPL.
             3:00 P.M.     Administrator Truly's address to
                           the National Faculty of the
                           Challenger Centers for Space
                           Science Education taped on August 1.

Friday, August 10......
  11:00 A.M.-1:30 P.M.     Live coverage of Magellan arrival at
                           Venus from Mission Control.
        2:30-4:30 P.M.     Magellan Post Venus Orbit Insertion
                           News Conference.

NOTE:  Every Wednesday, from August 15-September 5, the Magellan 
at Venus Report will be carried from 1:15-1:30 P.M. EDT.

---------------------------------------------------------------
All events and times may change without notice.  This report is
filed daily, Monday through Friday at 12:00 P.M., EDT.  This is  
a service of the Internal Communications Branch, NASA HQ.  
Contact:  JSTANHOPE or CREDMOND on NASAmail or at 202/453-8425.
---------------------------------------------------------------
NASA Select TV:  Satcom F2R, Transponder 13, C-Band, 72 Degrees 
West Longitude, Audio 6.8, Frequency 3960 MHz.  JSNEWS8-9/23905
---------------------------------------------------------------
