
   RANDALL SCOTT SILKWOOD, PETITIONER V. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

   No. 89-6750

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1989

   On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari To The United States Court Of
Appeals For The Tenth Circuit

   Brief For The United States

                             OPINION BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 1a-11a) is reported
at 893 F.2d 245.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on December 23,
1989.  The petition for a writ of certiorari was filed on February 21,
1990.  The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C.
1254(1).

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether the Texas offense of burglary is a "violent felony" under
the sentence enhancement provision of 18 U.S.C. 924(e)(1) and
924(e)(2)(B)(ii) (Supp. V 1987).

                               STATEMENT

   1. Petitioner was indicted in the Eastern District of Oklahoma on
one count of possession of a firearm by a previously convicted felon,
in violation of 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(1).  A separately filed "information"
alleged that petitioner had six previous convictions for burglary
under Texas law, /1/ one previous state conviction for escape, and one
previous state firearms conviction, thus subjecting him to an enhanced
sentence of a minimum of 15 years' imprisonment under 18 U.S.C.
924(e)(1) (Supp. V 1987).  /2/ Pet. App. 2a;  Pet. C.A. Br. 34-36.

   The jury convicted petitioner.  Petitioner later fired his attorney
and, with the district court's permission, represented himself at the
sentencing hearing.  The district court sentenced petitioner to an
enhanced term of 25 years' imprisonment under Section 924(e)(1).  Pet.
App. 2a, 7a-8a.

   2. On appeal, petitioner contended that the district court's
allowing him to proceed pro se violated the Sixth Amendment.  Pet.
C.A. Br. 22-29.  Petitioner also contended that his previous Texas
convictions for burglary were not "violent felonies" under 18 U.S.C.
924(e).  In his view, Section 924(e) included only those burglaries
that involve violent conduct.  Pet. C.A. Br. 29-38.  /3/

   The court of appeals held that the district court had conducted an
insufficient inquiry regarding petitioner's waiver of his right to
counsel, and thus "remand(ed) this case for resentencing and
direct(ed) the sentencing court to appoint counsel for (petitioner)
unless, after proper inquiry, (petitioner) waives that right." Pet.
App. 9a.  In order to guide petitioner's resentencing, the court of
appeals addressed his contention regarding the scope of the term
"burglary" in Section 924(e).  After surveying the conflicting
decisions among the circuits, the court of appeals concluded that the
statute retained the generic definition contained in its predecessor,
18 U.S.C. App. 1202(c)(9) (Supp. II 1984), namely, "any felony
consisting of entering or remaining surreptitiously within a building
that is property of another with intent to engage in conduct
constituting a Federal or State offense." Pet. App. 10a-11a.  The
court therefore instructed the district court to "apply that
definition when it determines which of (petitioner's) prior burglary
convictions should count towards enhancement (under Section 924(e))."
Pet. App. 11a.

                               ARGUMENT

   Petitioner now contends (Pet. 3-8) that only those burglaries that
satisfy the common law definition of burglary qualify as "violent
felon(ies)" under the sentence enhancement provision of 18 U.S.C.
924(e)(1) and 924(e)(2)(B)(ii) (Supp. V 1987).  In Taylor v. United
States, No. 88-7194 (argued Feb. 28, 1990), this Court has granted
certiorari to resolve the conflict among the circuits concerning the
meaning of the term "burglary" under Section 924(e)(2)(B)(ii).  In our
submission to this Court in Taylor, /4/ we have described the
conflicting decisions among the courts of appeals and have explained
that the statutory reference to burglary is not limited either to
common law burglary or to burglaries that pose a potential risk of
physical injury.  To the contrary, even though Congress failed to
include an express definition of burglary in its most recent
amendments to Section 924(e), Congress retained the generic definition
of burglary that was contained in the predecessor Armed Career
Criminal Act of 1984, 18 U.S.C. App. 1202(c)(9) (Supp. II 1984), a
definition that reflects the prevailing modern view of the offense of
burglary as defined in federal and state law, i.e., the unlawful
entering or remaining within a building belonging to another with the
intent to commit a federal or state offense.  That interpretation is
consistent with the language, legislative history, and purposes of the
1986 amendments to the Armed Career Criminal Act of 1984.

   Petitioner's six Texas burglary convictions therefore qualify as
predicate crimes, since those state offenses, by definition, require
entering a building belonging to another for the purpose of committing
a state or federal offense.  See note 1, supra.  Although petitioner
is awaiting sentencing, which makes this case "not yet ripe for review
by this Court," Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen v. Bangor, 389 U.S.
327, 328 (1967), we nevertheless believe that the Court should hold
the instant petition pending the disposition of Taylor v. United
States, No. 88-7194.

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of certiorari should be held pending the
disposition of Taylor v. United States, No. 88-7194, and disposed of
as appropriate in light of that decision.

   Respectfully submitted.

   KENNETH W. STARR

      Solicitor General

   EDWARD S.G. DENNIS, JR.

      Assistant Attorney General

   ANDREW LEVCHUK

      Attorney

   APRIL 1990

   /1/ On August 9 and 23, 1973, petitioner was convicted of burglary
in Texas state court.  See Information 1-2, United States v. Silkwood,
No. 88-20-CR (E.D. Okla. filed May 23, 1988).  At the time of those
offenses, Texas state law defined burglary as follows:

         The offense of burglary is constituted by entering a house by
      force, threats or fraud, at night, or in like manner by entering
      a house at any time, either day or night, and remaining
      concealed therein, with the intent in either case of committing
      a felony or the crime of theft.

Tex. Penal Code art. 1389 (1925).

   Between May 9, 1977, and July 31, 1980, petitioner was convicted of
four separate offenses of burglary of a building in Texas state court.
 See Information 1-2, supra.  At the time of those offenses, Texas
state law defined burglary as follows:

         A person commits an offense if, without the effective consent
      of the owner, he:

         (1) enters a habitation, or a building * * * not then open to
      the public, with intent to commit a felony or theft;  or

         (2) remains concealed, with intent to commit a felony or
      theft, in a building or habitation;  or

         (3) enters a building or habitation and commits or attempts
      to commit a felony or theft.

Tex. Penal Code Ann. Section 30.02(a) (Vernon 1974).

   /2/ The sentence enhancement provision of 18 U.S.C. 924(e)(1)
applies to previously convicted felons who possess or receive a
firearm in violation of 18 U.S.C. 922(g).  Title 18, United States
Code, Section 924(e)(1), provides in pertinent part:

         In the case of a person who violates section 922(g) of this
      title and has three previous convictions by any court referred
      to in section 922(g)(1) of this title for a violent felony or a
      serious drug offense, or both, such person shall be fined not
      more than $25,000 and imprisoned not less than fifteen years * *
      *.

Title 18, United States Code, Section 922(g)(1), refers to any
"convict(ion) in any court of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a
term exceeding one year."

   Title 18, United States Code, Section 924(e)(2)(B), provides:

      (T)he term "violent felony" means any crime punishable by
      imprisonment for a term exceeding one year that -- (i) has as an
      element the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical
      force against the person of another;  or (ii) is burglary,
      arson, or extortion, involves use of explosives, or otherwise
      involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of
      physical injury to another.

   /3/ Petitioner also argued that the district court had erroneously
refused to suppress evidence, that the government had improperly
withheld Brady information, and that the district court had erred in
refusing to declare a mistrial on two occasions.  Pet. C.A. Br. 7-29.
The court of appeals rejected each of those claims, Pet. App. 4a-5a,
and petitioner does not renew those challenges in this Court.

   /4/ See U.S. Br. 11-37.  We have provided a copy of our brief in
Taylor to counsel for petitioner in this case.
