SBIR 00-1

National Aeronautics and Space Administration

SBIR:
Small Business Innovation Research
Program Solicitation

A searchable version of this document is located at:
http://sbir.nasa.gov


Opening Date: April 24, 2000
Closing Date: July 14, 2000




2000 NASA Small Business Innovation Research Program Solicitation


1.  Program Description

1.1 Introduction

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) invites eligible small 
business concerns (SBCs) to submit Phase-I proposals for its 2000 Small Business 
Innovation Research (SBIR) Program.  NASA seeks innovative concepts addressing 
the program needs and offering commercial application potential as described in 
the Solicitation 
subtopics.

This Solicitation contains program background information, outlines eligibility 
requirements for participants, describes the three SBIR program phases, and 
provides information for submitting responsive proposals.  The 2000 Solicitation 
period for Phase-I proposals begins April 24, 2000 and ends July 14, 2000.  
Unsolicited proposals will not be accepted. 

To be eligible for selection, a proposal must be based on an innovation having 
high technical or scientific merit that is responsive to a NASA need described 
by a subtopic in this Solicitation.  Proposals involving high risk are 
encouraged when the anticipated payoff is great.  Proposals submitted in 
response to this Solicitation must include all relevant documentation as 
required in Section 3.  A proposal directed towards system studies, market 
research, routine engineering development of existing products or proven 
concepts and modifications of existing products without innovative changes is 
considered non-responsive.  Selection preference will be given to eligible 
proposals where the innovations are judged to have significant potential for 
commercial application.  

Subject to the availability of funds, NASA plans to select about 290 proposals 
in mid-October 2000 for negotiation of Phase-I fixed-price contracts.  NASA 
anticipates that about 40 percent of these Phase-I projects will be selected for 
Phase-II.  The FY 2000 NASA SBIR Program budget is approximately $92.1M.

1.2 Program Background

1.2.1 Legislative Basis.  This Solicitation is issued pursuant to the authority 
contained in P.L. 97-219, as amended (Small Business Innovation Development Act 
of 1982) (15 U.S.C. 638).  SBIR policy is provided by the Small Business 
Administration (SBA) through its Policy Directive dated January 26, 1993.  The 
current law authorizes agencies participating in the SBIR Program to expend with 
small business concerns not less than 2.5 percent of their extramural 
Research/Research and Development (R/R&D) budgets in FY 2000.

1.2.2 Program Purposes.  The purposes of the SBIR program as established by law 
are: to stimulate technological innovation in the private sector; to strengthen 
the role of small business concerns in meeting federal research and development 
needs; to increase the commercial application of these research results; and to 
encourage participation of socially and economically disadvantaged persons and 
women-owned small businesses.

1.3 Program Management

The NASA Office of Aero-Space Technology provides overall policy direction for 
the SBIR program.  The Program Management Office is hosted at the Goddard Space 
Flight Center.  The NASA Installations identify R&D needs, evaluate proposals, 
make recommendations for selections, and manage individual projects.  All NASA 
Strategic Enterprises and Field Installations participate in the Program.  NASA 
installations are:

Ames Research Center,  www.arc.nasa.gov	
Dryden Flight Research Center,  www.dfrc.nasa.gov	
Glenn Research Center,  www.grc.nasa.gov	
Goddard Space Flight Center,  www.gsfc.nasa.gov
Jet Propulsion Laboratory,  www.jpl.nasa.gov	
Johnson Space Center,  www.jsc.nasa.gov
Kennedy Space Center,  www.ksc.nasa.gov
Langley Research Center,  www.larc.nasa.gov
Marshall Space Flight Center,  www.msfc.nasa.gov
NASA Headquarters,  www.hq.nasa.gov	
Stennis Space Center,  www.ssc.nasa.gov

1.4 Three Phase SBIR Program
 
The NASA SBIR Program is a three-phase program utilizing the entrepreneurial 
talents of the SBC for meeting the needs of both NASA and the commercial 
marketplace.

1.4.1 Phase-I.  The purpose of Phase-I is to determine the scientific, 
technical, and commercial merit and feasibility of the proposed innovation, and 
the quality of the SBC's performance with a relatively small NASA investment 
before consideration of further Federal support in Phase-II.  NASA funding for 
each Phase-I contract is limited to $70,000. Contractors have up to 6 months to 
submit their final report. Successful completion of Phase-I objectives is a 
prerequisite to Phase-II consideration.

Phase-I must concentrate on establishing the scientific or technical merit and 
feasibility of the proposed innovation and on providing a basis for continued 
development in Phase-II.  Proposals must conform to the format described in 
Section 3.2 of this Solicitation.  Evaluation and selection criteria are 
described in Section 4.1.  NASA is solely responsible for determining the 
relative merit of proposals, their selection for award, and judging the value of 
Phase-I results.

1.4.2 Phase-II.  The objective of Phase-II is to continue the R/R&D effort from 
Phase-I. Only SBCs awarded Phase-I contracts are eligible for Phase-II SBIR 
funding agreements, and only at the Federal Agency which awarded the Phase-I 
project.  The Government is not obligated to fund any specific SBIR Phase-II 
proposal.  Funding for each Phase-II contract will be limited to $600,000.  
Contractors have up to 24 months to complete the effort and submit their final 
report. 

Phase-II projects are chosen as a result of competitive evaluations based on 
selection criteria provided in Section 4.2. Phase-II proposals are more 
comprehensive than those required for Phase-I and are to be prepared in 
accordance with instructions provided in the Phase-I contract.  

1.4.3 Phase-III.  NASA may award Phase-III contracts for products or services 
with non-SBIR funds.  Phase-I and Phase-II awards satisfy the requirements of 
the Competition in Contracting Act for subsequent NASA Phase-III contracting. 
The small business is also expected to use non-Federal capital to pursue private 
sector applications of the R/R&D effort.

1.5 Eligibility to Participate in the SBIR Program

1.5.1 Small Business Concern.  Only firms qualifying as SBCs as defined in 
Section 2.1 of this Solicitation are eligible to participate in the SBIR 
program. Socially and economically disadvantaged and women-owned SBCs are 
particularly encouraged to propose.

1.5.2 Place of Performance.  For both Phase-I and Phase-II, the R/R&D must be 
performed in the United States (Section 2.7).

1.5.3 Principal Investigator.  The Principal Investigator (PI) is considered key 
to the success of the effort and must make a substantial commitment to the 
project. The following requirements are applicable:

Functions.  The functions of the PI are: planning and directing the SBIR 
project; leading it technically and making substantial personal contributions 
during its implementation; serving as the primary contact with NASA on the 
project; and ensuring that the work proceeds according to contract agreements.  
Competent management of PI functions is essential to project success.  The 
Phase-I proposal shall describe the nature of the PI's activities and the amount 
of time that the PI will apply personally on the project.  The amount of time 
the PI proposes to spend on the project must be acceptable to the NASA 
contracting officer.

Qualifications.  The qualifications and capabilities of the proposed PI and the 
basis for PI selection are to be clearly presented in the proposal.  NASA has 
the sole right to accept or reject a substitute PI based on factors such as 
education, experience, demonstrated ability and competence, and any other 
evidence related to the specific assignment.

Primary Employment.  The offeror must certify in the proposal that the primary 
employment of the PI will be with the SBC at the time of award and during the 
conduct of the project.  Primary employment means that the PI will average a 
minimum of 20 hours per week with the SBC, and that more than half of the PI's 
total employed time (including all concurrent employers, consulting, and self-
employed time) is spent with the SBC.  If the PI does not meet these primary 
employment requirements, the offeror must explain how these requirements will be 
met if the proposal is selected for contract negotiations that may lead to an 
award.

Employees of Academic and Non-Profit Organizations.  An offeror proposing a PI 
who is also to be employed concurrently in any capacity by an academic or non-
profit organization must include, as part of the proposal, a written release 
statement.  The PI release statement shall approve concurrent primary employment 
with the SBC as defined above, and agree to less than half-time employment by 
the organization beginning no later than the time of NASA SBIR contract award 
and continuing thereafter during contract performance.  The organization must 
specifically release the employee from all duties, responsibilities, and 
activities required by or implied by employment in that position as much as or 
more than half-time.  Proposals that do not include the required written release 
statement may be rejected. 

Co-Principal Investigators.  Co-PI's are not acceptable. 

Misrepresentation or Substitution. Substitution of a PI by the offeror at any 
time without NASA's advance written approval, or misrepresentation of PI 
qualifications and eligibility, will result in rejection of the proposal or 
termination of the contract.

1.6 General Information

1.6.1 Solicitation Distribution.  This 2000 SBIR Program Solicitation is 
available via the NASA SBIR/STTR homepage (http://sbir.nasa.gov).  If the SBC 
has difficulty accessing the Solicitation, contact the Help Desk (Section 
1.6.2).

SBCs are encouraged to check the SBIR/STTR homepage for program updates.  Any 
updates or corrections to the Solicitation will be posted there.

1.6.2 Means of Contacting NASA SBIR Program 

1. NASA SBIR/STTR Homepage:  http://sbir.nasa.gov 

2. Each of the NASA field centers has its own homepage including strategic 
planning and SBIR information.  Please consult these homepages as noted in 
Section 1.3 for more details on the technology requirements within the subtopic 
areas.

3. Help Desk.  For inquiries, requests, and help-related questions, contact via:

e-mail    sbir@reisys.com 
telephone 301-937-0888 between 8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. (Mon.-Fri., Eastern Time) 
facsimile 301-937-0204

The requestor must provide the name and telephone number of the person to 
contact, the organization name and address, and the specific questions or 
requests.

4. NASA SBIR/STTR Program Manager.  Specific information requests that could not 
be answered by the Help Desk should be mailed to:

Paul Mexcur, Program Manager
NASA SBIR/STTR Program Management Office 
Code 710, Building 3, Room 108
Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, MD 20771-0001

1.6.3 Questions About This Solicitation.  To ensure fairness, questions relating 
to the intent and/or content of research topics in this Solicitation cannot be 
answered during the Phase-I Solicitation period.  Only questions requesting 
clarification of proposal instructions and administrative matters will be 
answered.

2.  Definitions 

2.1 Small Business Concern 

An SBC is one that, at the time of award of Phase-I and Phase-II funding 
agreements, meets the following criteria:
		  
1. Is independently owned and operated, is not dominant in the field of 
operation in which it is proposing, has its principal place of business located 
in the United States, and is organized for profit;
	
2. Is at least 51 percent owned, or in the case of a publicly-owned business, at 
least 51 percent of its voting stock is owned by United States citizens or 
lawfully admitted permanent resident aliens; and
	
3. Has, including its affiliates, a number of employees not exceeding 500 and 
meets the other regulatory requirements found in 13 CFR Part 121.  Business 
concerns, other than investment companies licensed, or state development 
companies qualifying under the Small Business Investment Act of 1958, 15 U.S.C. 
661, et seq., are affiliates of one another when, either directly or indirectly, 
1) one concern controls or has the power to control the other or 2) a third 
party controls or has the power to control both.  Control can be exercised 
through common ownership, common management, and contractual relationships.  The 
terms "affiliates" and "number of employees" are defined in greater detail in 13 
CFR 121. 

Small business concerns include sole proprietorships, partnerships, 
corporations, 
joint ventures, associations, or cooperatives.  Eligible joint ventures are 
limited to no more than 49 percent participation by foreign business entities.

2.2 Research or Research and Development (R/R&D)

Any activity that is 1) a systematic, intensive study directed toward greater 
knowledge or understanding of the subject studied, 2) a systematic study 
directed specifically toward applying new knowledge to meet a recognized need, 
or 3) a systematic application of knowledge toward the production of useful 
materials, devices, systems, or methods, including the design, development, and 
improvement of prototypes and new processes to meet specific requirements.

2.3 Subcontract

Any agreement, other than one involving an employer-employee relationship, 
entered into by a Federal Government contractor calling for supplies or services 
required solely for the performance of the original funding agreement.

2.4 Socially and Economically Disadvantaged Small Business Concern

A socially and economically disadvantaged SBC is one that is: 1) at least 51 
percent owned by (i) an Indian tribe or a native Hawaiian organization or (ii) 
one or more socially and economically disadvantaged individuals; and 2) whose 
management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more socially 
and economically disadvantaged individuals.

2.5 Socially and Economically Disadvantaged Individual

A member of any of the following groups: Black Americans, Hispanic Americans, 
Native Americans, Asian-Pacific Americans, Subcontinent-Asian Americans, other 
groups designated from time to time by SBA to be socially disadvantaged, or any 
other individual found to be socially and economically disadvantaged by SBA 
pursuant to Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act, 15 U.S.C. 637(a). 

2.6 Women-Owned Small Business

A women-owned SBC is one that is at least 51 percent owned by a woman or women 
who also control and operate it. "Control" in this context means exercising the 
power to make policy decisions.  "Operate" in this context means being actively 
involved in the day-to-day management.

2.7 United States 

Means the 50 states, the territories and possessions of the United States, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and the 
District of Columbia.

2.8 Commercialization

Commercialization is a process of developing markets and producing and 
delivering products or services for sale (whether by the originating party or by 
others).  As used here, commercialization includes both Government and non-
government markets.

3.  Proposal Preparation Instructions and Requirements

3.1 Fundamental Considerations

Multiple Proposal Submissions.  An offeror may submit different proposals in 
response to any number of subtopics, but every proposal must be based on an 
unique innovation, must be limited in scope to just one subtopic, and may be 
submitted only under that subtopic.  Submitting substantially equivalent 
proposals to several subtopics is not permitted and may result in all such 
proposals being rejected without evaluation. 

End Deliverables.  The deliverable item at the end of a Phase-I contract shall 
be a professional quality report that justifies, validates, and defends the 
experimental and theoretical work accomplished. Delivery of a product or service 
with the Phase-I report may be desirable, but it is not a requirement.

Deliverable items for Phase-II contracts shall include products or services in 
addition to professional quality reports of further developments or applications 
of the Phase-I results.  These deliverables may include prototypes, models, 
software, or complete products or services.  The reported results of Phase-II 
must address and provide the basis for validating the innovation and the 
potential for implementation of commercial applications.

Note:  As part of the Phase-I and Phase-II deliverables, a non-proprietary 
technical abstract of findings shall be submitted by the offeror via the 
SBIR/STTR homepage.

3.2 Phase-I Proposal Requirements

3.2.1 General Requirements

Page Limitation.  A Phase-I SBIR proposal shall not exceed a total of 25 tandard 
8 1/2 x 11 inch (21.6 x 27.9 cm) pages.  A page is defined as a single side of a 
piece of paper. All four proposal items required in Section 3.2.2 will be 
included within this total.  Each page shall be numbered consecutively at the 
bottom. Margins should be 1.0 inch (2.5 cm). Samples, videotapes, slides, or 
other ancillary items will not be accepted.  Offerors are requested not to use 
the entire 25-page allowance unless necessary.  Proposals exceeding the 25 page 
limitation will be rejected during administrative screening.  The program would 
prefer proposals prepared on both sides of the paper, if possible.  

Type Size.  No type size smaller than 10 point is to be used for text or tables, 
except as legends on reduced drawings.  Proposals prepared with smaller font 
sizes will be rejected without consideration.

Brevity and Organization.  The proposal should be focused, concise, and 
organized in accordance with the Solicitation requirements.
 
Classified Information.  NASA does not accept SBIR proposals that contain 
classified information.

3.2.2 Format Requirements.  All required items of information must be covered in 
the proposal.  The space allocated to each part of the technical proposal will 
depend on the project chosen and the offeror's approach. 

Each proposal submitted must contain the following in the order presented:

1. Proposal Cover (Form 9A), signed in ink, as page 1.
2. Proposal Summary (Form 9B), as page 2.
3. Technical Proposal (11 Parts), including all graphics, and starting at page 3 
with a table of contents. 
4. Summary Budget (Form 9C), signed in ink.

3.2.3 Proposal Cover and Proposal Summary

Page 1: Proposal Cover (Form 9A).  A copy of the Proposal Cover is provided in 
Section 9.  The offeror shall provide complete information for each item and 
submit the form as required in Section 6.  The proposal project title shall be 
concise and descriptive of the proposed effort.  The title should not use 
acronyms or words like "Development of" or "Study of."  The NASA research topic 
title must not be used as the proposal title.

Page 2: Proposal Summary (Form 9B).  A copy of the Proposal Summary is provided 
in Section 9.  The offeror shall provide complete information for each item and 
submit Form 9B as required in Section 6.  The technical abstract portion is 
limited to 200 words and shall summarize the implications of the approach and 
the anticipated results of both Phase-I and Phase-II.  Potential commercial 
applications of the technology should also be presented. If the technical 
abstract is judged to be non-responsive to the subtopic, the proposal will be 
rejected without further evaluation. 

Note:  Forms 9A and 9B, the Proposal Cover and the Proposal Summary, including 
the Technical Abstract, are public information and may be disclosed. Do not 
include proprietary information.  

3.2.4 Technical Proposal.  This part of the submission shall not contain any 
budget data and must consist of all eleven parts listed below in the given order 
and numbered.  A proposal omitting any part will be considered non-responsive to 
this Solicitation and may be rejected during administrative screening.  Parts 
that are not applicable must be noted as "Not Applicable." 

Part 1: Table of Contents.  Page 3 of the proposal shall begin with a brief 
table of contents indicating the page numbers of each of the parts of the 
proposal. 

Part 2: Identification and Significance of the Innovation.  The first paragraph 
of Part 2 shall contain 1) a clear and succinct statement of the specific 
innovation proposed, and why it is an innovation, and 2) a brief explanation of 
how the innovation is relevant and important to meeting the technology need 
described in the subtopic.  The initial paragraph shall contain no more than 200 
words.  NASA will reject proposals that lack explanation of the innovation.  In 
subsequent paragraphs, Part 2 may also include appropriate background and 
elaboration to explain the proposed innovation. 

Part 3: Technical Objectives.  State the specific objectives of the Phase-I 
R/R&D effort including the technical questions that must be answered to 
determine the feasibility of the proposed innovation.

Part 4: Work Plan.  Phase-I R/R&D should address the objectives and questions 
cited in Part 3.  The work plan should indicate what will be done, where it will 
be done, and how it will be done.  The methods planned to achieve each objective 
or task should be discussed in detail.  Schedules, task descriptions and 
assignments, resource allocations, estimated task hours for each key personnel, 
and planned accomplishments including project milestones shall be included. 

Part 5: Related R/R&D.  Describe significant current and/or previous R/R&D that 
is directly related to the proposal including any conducted by the principal 
investigator or by the offeror.  Describe how it relates to the proposed effort 
and any planned coordination with outside sources.  The offeror must persuade 
reviewers of his or her awareness of key recent R/R&D conducted by others in the 
specific subject area.  At the offeror's option, this section may include 
concise bibliographic references in support of the proposal if they are confined 
to activities directly related to the proposed work.

Part 6: Key Personnel and Bibliography of Directly Related Work.  Identify key 
personnel involved in Phase-I activities.  Key personnel are the principal 
investigator and other individuals whose expertise and functions are essential 
to the success of the project.  Provide bibliographic information including 
directly related education and experience.   

This part shall also establish and confirm the eligibility of the principal 
investigator (Section 1.5.3), and indicate the extent to which other proposals 
recently submitted or planned for submission in 2000 and existing projects 
commit the time of PI concurrently with this proposed activity.  Any attempt to 
circumvent the restriction on PIs working more than half-time for an academic or 
a non-profit organization by substituting an ineligible PI will result in 
rejection of the proposal.

Part 7: Relationship with Phase-II or Future R/R&D.  State the anticipated 
results of the proposed R/R&D effort if the project is successful (through 
Phase-I and Phase-II).  Discuss the significance of the Phase-I effort in 
providing a foundation for the Phase-II R/R&D continuation.

Part 8: Company Information and Facilities.  Provide adequate information to 
allow the evaluators to assess the ability of the SBC team to carry out the 
proposed Phase-I and projected Phase-II and Phase-III activities.  The offeror 
should describe the relevant facilities and equipment currently available, and 
those to be purchased, to support the proposed activities.  NASA will not fund 
the acquisition of equipment, instrumentation, or facilities under SBIR Phase-I 
contracts as a direct cost (Section 5.17). 

The capability of the offeror to perform the proposed activities and bring a 
resulting product or service to market must be indicated.  Qualifications of the 
offeror and its principals in marketing-related products or services or in 
raising capital should be presented.

If an offeror proposes the use of unique or one-of-a-kind Government facilities, 
a statement, describing the uniqueness of the facility and its availability to 
the offeror at specified times, signed by the appropriate Government official 
must be included with the proposal.  Proposals lacking this signed statement may 
be rejected without evaluation.  If the proposer does not require the use of 
Government facilities or equipment, the proposer shall so state in this part of 
the proposal. 

Part 9: Subcontracts and Consultants.  The SBC may establish business 
arrangements with other entities or individuals to participate in performance of 
the proposed R/R&D effort provided such arrangements do not exceed one-third of 
the research and/or analytical work (amount requested including cost sharing if 
any, less fee, if any).  The offeror must describe all subcontracting or other 
business arrangements, and identify the relevant organizations and/or 
individuals with whom arrangements are planned.  The proposal must include a 
signed statement by each participating organization or individual that they will 
be available at the times required for the purposes and extent of effort 
described in the proposal.  Failure to provide certification(s) may result in 
rejection of the proposal.

The expertise to be provided by entities other than the SBC must be described in 
detail, as well as the functions, services, number of hours and labor rates, and 
their extent of the effort.  The proposal must include certifications by each 
participating organization and individual consultant that they will be available 
at the times required for the purposes and extent of effort described in the 
proposal.  Subcontractors' and consultants' work must be performed in the United 
States.

Part 10: Commercial Applications Potential.  The commercial potential of the 
proposed SBIR project is a significant evaluation factor (Section 4.1.2).  
Therefore, offerors will discuss in this section the broad commercial 
applications for their project results and plans to bring the technology to 
commercial application.  Offerors should discuss the following: 

1) The specific commercial products or services contemplated and the 
corresponding target market niche; 
2) Expected unique competitive advantage of the commercial products or services; 
3) Nature of the corresponding contemplated commercial venture; 
4) Importance of the contemplated commercial venture to the offeror's current 
competitive position and to its strategic planning; and
5) The offeror's capability and plans to bring the necessary physical, 
personnel, and financial resources to bear, in a timely way, to result in a 
viable commercial venture in the near term subsequent to Phase-II (if awarded).

Part 11: Similar Proposals and Awards.  A firm may elect to submit proposals for 
essentially equivalent work under other federal program solicitations.  However, 
NASA will not fund duplicate proposals for essentially equivalent work under any 
Government program.  The offeror will inform NASA of related proposals and 
awards and clearly state whether the SBC has submitted currently active 
proposals for similar work under other Federal Government program solicitations 
or intends to submit proposals for such work to other agencies during 2000.  For 
all such cases, the following information is required:

1) The name and address of the agencies to which proposals have been or will be 
submitted, or from which awards have been received;
2) Dates of such proposal submissions or awards;
3) Title, number, and date of solicitations under which proposals have been or 
will be submitted or awards received;
4) The specific applicable research topic for each such proposal submitted or 
award received;
5) Titles of research projects;
6) Name and title of the principal investigator/project manager for each 
proposal that has been or will be submitted, or from which awards have been 
received.

Note:  All eleven (11) parts must be included.  Parts that are not applicable 
must be included and marked "Not Applicable."

3.2.5 Proposed Budget

Summary Budget (Form 9C).  The offeror shall complete the Summary Budget, 
following the instructions provided with the form (Section 9) and include it and 
any explanation sheets, if needed, as the last page(s) of the proposal.  
Information shall be submitted to explain the offeror's plans for use of the 
requested funds to enable NASA to determine whether the proposed budget is fair 
and reasonable. 

Property.  NASA will not fund facility acquisition under Phase-I (Section 5.17).  
Proposed costs for materials may be included.  "Materials" means property that 
may be incorporated or attached to a deliverable end item or that may be 
consumed or expended in performing the contract.  It includes assemblies, 
components, parts, raw materials, and small tools that may be consumed in normal 
use.  Any purchase of equipment or products under an SBIR contract using NASA 
funds should be American-made to the extent possible.

Travel.  Travel during Phase-I is not normally allowed to prove technical merit 
and feasibility of the proposed innovation.  However, where the offeror deems 
travel to be essential for these purposes, it is necessary to limit it to one 
person, one trip to the sponsoring NASA installation.  Proposed travel must be 
described as to purpose and benefits in proving feasibility, and is subject to 
negotiation and approval by the contracting officer.  Trips to conferences are 
not allowed under the Phase-I contract.

Profit.  A profit or fee may be included in the proposed budget as noted in 
Section 5.12.

Cost Sharing.  See Section 5.11.

3.2.6 Addendum

Prior SBIR Phase-II Awards.  The Small Business Administration requires 
offerors, who have received more than 15 Phase-II awards from all agencies in 
the prior 5 fiscal years, to report those awards and their progress toward 
commercialization.  The listing of awards shall be included in a separate 
"Addendum: Phase-II History" that will not be counted against the Phase-I 25-
page proposal limit.  The Addendum should be concise.  Information for each 
Phase-II contract shall include:

1.	Name of awarding agency
2.	Date of award and date of completion
3.	Funding agreement number and amount
4.	Topic or subtopic name
5.	Project title
6.	Sources, dates and amounts of federal and/or private sector Phase-III 
follow-on funding agreements
7.	Post-Phase-II commercialization activities, including development, 
marketing, sales, and projections

Prior NASA SBIR Awards.  Provide a list of NASA SBIR Phase-I and Phase-II awards 
received, showing contract numbers, the year of award, Phase-I or Phase-II, the 
NASA Installations making the award, and project titles. 

Note: Companies with Prior NASA SBIR Awards

NASA has instituted a comprehensive commercialization survey/data gathering 
process for companies with prior NASA SBIR awards.  Information received from 
SBIR companies completing the survey is kept confidential, and will not be made 
public except in broad aggregate, with no company specific attribution.

Responding to the survey is strictly voluntary.  However, the SBIR Source 
Selection Official does see the information contained within the survey as 
adding to the program's ability to use past performance in decision making.

If you have not completed a survey, or if you would like to update a previously 
submitted response, please contact Jack Yadvish at NASA Headquarters by email at 
jyadvish@mail.hq.nasa.gov, or phone at 202-358-1981.

3.3 Phase-II Proposal Requirements

The Phase-I contract will serve as a request for proposal (RFP) for the Phase-II 
follow-on project.  Phase-II proposals are more comprehensive than those 
required for Phase-I.  Submission of a Phase-II proposal is strictly voluntary 
and NASA assumes no responsibility for any proposal preparation expenses.  

Proposal Contents.  Proposals shall be prepared in the following order.  Failure 
to include any requested information in the proposal may make it non-responsive 
to the RFP.  The proposal shall not contain any budget data and must consist of 
all 13 parts numbered and in following order.  A proposal omitting any part will 
be considered non-responsive to this Solicitation and may be rejected during 
administrative screening. 
	
	Part 1: Proposal Cover.  (Form provided by awarding Center) 
	Part 2: Proposal Summary.  (Form provided by awarding Center) 
	Part 3: Table of Contents. 
	Part 4: Results of the Phase-I Project.  Briefly describe how Phase-I has 
proven the feasibility of the innovation, provided a rationale for both NASA and 
commercial applications, and demonstrated the ability of the offeror to conduct 
R/R&D.

	Part 5: Technical Objectives, Approach and Work Plan.  Define the specific 
objectives of the Phase-II research and technical approach; and provide a work 
plan defining specific tasks, performance schedules, milestones, and 
deliverables. 

	Part 6: Company Information.  Describe the capability of the firm to carry 
out Phase-II and Phase-III activities including its organization, operations, 
number of employees, R/R&D capabilities, and experience relevant to the work 
proposed.

        Part 7: Facilities and Equipment.  This section shall provide adequate 
information to allow the evaluators to assess the ability of the SBC to carry 
out the proposed Phase-II activities.  The offeror should describe the relevant 
facilities and equipment currently available, and those to be purchased, to 
support the proposed activities.  NASA will not fund the acquisition of 
equipment, instrumentation, or facilities under SBIR Phase-II contracts as a 
direct cost (Section 5.17).  

If an offeror proposes the use of unique or one-of-a-kind Government facilities, 
a statement, describing the uniqueness of the facility and its availability to 
the offeror at specified times, signed by the appropriate Government official 
must be included with the proposal.  Proposals lacking this signed statement may 
be rejected without evaluation.  

If the proposal does not require the use of Government facilities or equipment, 
the offeror shall so state in this part of the proposal.

	Part 8: Key Personnel.  Identify the key personnel for the project, 
confirm their availability for Phase-II, and discuss their qualifications in 
terms of education, work experience, and accomplishments relevant to the 
project. 

	Part 9: Subcontracts and Consultants.  Describe in detail any subcontract, 
consultant, or other business arrangements involving participation in 
performance of the proposed R/R&D effort and provide written evidence of their 
availability for the project. For Phase-II, a minimum of one-half of the work 
(contract cost less profit) must be performed by the proposing SBC unless 
approved in writing by the contracting officer.  The proposal must include a 
commitment from each subcontractor and/or consultant that they will be available 
at the times required for the purposes and extent of effort described in the 
proposal.  Subcontractors and consultants work must be performed in the United 
States.  Failure to provide subcontractor/consultant commitments may result in 
rejection of proposal.

	Part 10: Commercialization and Phase-III Plans.  Describe plans for 
commercialization (Phase-III) in terms of each of the following areas:

		(1) Product or Service Commercial Feasibility: Provide a description 
of the (a) contemplated commercial product and/or service, the corresponding 
commercial venture, and the unique competitive advantage of both; and (b) 
technical obstacles to commercial applications, as well as plans to address 
them.

		(2) Market Feasibility and Competition: Describe: (a) the target 
market niche including the distinction between U.S. Government and other 
markets; (b) estimated potential market size in terms of revenues to be realized 
by the offer from U.S. Government markets and, separately, from other markets; 
(c) competitive environment in terms of present and likely competing similar and 
alternative technologies, and corresponding competing domestic and foreign 
entities; (d) significant developments within the targeted business sector; and 
(e) offeror's ability, if any, to protect relevant technology with patents or 
rights to exclusive access.

		(3) Strategic Relevance to the Offeror: Describe the relevance of 
the targeted commercial venture to the offeror's: (a) current business segments; 
(b) relative position with respect to its competitors; and (c) strategic 
planning for the next 5 years.

		(4) Key Management, Technical Personnel and Organizational 
Structure: Describe: (a) the skills and experience of key management and 
technical personnel relevant to bringing innovative technology to commercial 
application, (b) current organizational structure, and (c) plans and timeline 
for obtaining the balance of all necessary key business development expertise 
and other staffing requirements.

		(5) Production and Operations: Describe: (a) business development 
progress to date regarding the contemplated commercial venture; (b) obstacles, 
plans, and associated milestones regarding all key business development 
elements; and (c) sources and components of private physical resources committed 
to date and plans for obtaining the balance of the necessary physical resources.  

		(6) Financial Planning:  Describe: (a) the amounts and sources of 
private financial resources expended and committed to date with respect to the 
technology development project, and with respect to business development of the 
targeted commercial venture; (b) significant requirements of potential 
investors, creditors, and insurers of the venture; (c) proforma statement of 
cash flow with respect to the targeted commercial venture that includes best 
estimates of at least the following major components and timing thereof: capital 
investment, revenues, principal and interest payments, depreciation of relevant 
assets, other operating expenses; and (d) evidence of the offeror's current 
financial strength (audited or unaudited financial statements may be appended to 
address this).
 
Part 11: Capital Commitments Supporting Phase-II and Phase-III.  Describe and 
document capital commitments from non-SBIR sources or from internal funds for 
pursuit of Phase-II and Phase-III.  Offerors for Phase-II contracts are strongly 
urged to obtain valid non-SBIR funding support commitments for follow-on 
Phase-III activities and additional support of Phase-II from parties other than 
the proposing firm.  Valid funding support commitments must provide that a 
specific, substantial amount will be made available to the firm to pursue the 
stated Phase-II and/or Phase-III objectives.  They must indicate the source, 
date, and conditions or contingencies under which the funds will be made 
available.  Alternatively, self-commitments of the same type and magnitude that 
are required from outside sources can be considered.  If Phase-III will be 
funded internally, offerors should describe their financial position.

Evidence of funding support commitments from outside parties must be provided in 
writing to the proposing entity and should accompany the Phase-II proposal.  
Letters of commitment should specify available funding commitments, other 
resources to be provided, and any contingent conditions.  Expressions of 
technical interest by such parties in the Phase-II research or of potential 
future financial support are insufficient and will not be accepted as support 
commitments by NASA. 

	Part 12: Related R/R&D.  Describe R/R&D related to the proposed work and 
affirm that the proposed objectives have not already been achieved and that the 
same development is not presently being pursued elsewhere under contract to the 
Government.

	Part 13: Proposal Pricing.  Special instructions for pricing the Phase-II 
proposal will be presented in the Phase-I contract and may be provided by the 
contracting officer.

4.  Method of Selection and Evaluation Criteria

4.1 Phase-I Proposals

Proposals judged to be responsive to the administrative requirements of this 
Solicitation and having a reasonable potential of meeting a NASA need, as 
evidenced by the technical abstract included in the Proposal Summary (Form 
9B), will be evaluated on a competitive basis.

4.1.1 Evaluation Process.  Proposals should provide all information needed for 
complete evaluation and evaluators are not expected to seek additional 
information.  Evaluations will be performed by NASA scientists and engineers 
and by qualified experts outside of NASA (including industry, academia, and 
other Government agencies) as required to determine or verify the merit of a 
proposal.  Offerors should not assume that evaluators are acquainted with the 
firm, key individuals, or with any experiments or other information.  Any 
pertinent references or publications should be noted in Part 5 of the technical 
proposal. 

4.1.2 Phase-I Evaluation Criteria.  NASA will give primary consideration to the 
scientific and technical merit and feasibility of the proposal and its benefit 
to NASA.  Each proposal will be judged and scored on its own merits using the 
factors described below:

Factor 1. Scientific/Technical Merit and Feasibility 
The proposed R/R&D effort will be evaluated on whether it offers a clearly 
innovative and feasible technical approach to the NASA problem area described in 
the subtopic.  Specific objectives, approaches and plans for developing and 
verifying the innovation must demonstrate a clear understanding of the problem 
and the current state-of-the-art.  The degree of understanding and significance 
of the risks involved in the proposed innovation must be presented. 

Factor 2. Experience, Qualifications and Facilities
The technical capabilities and experience of the principal investigator or 
project manager, key personnel, staff, consultants and subcontractors, if any, 
are evaluated for consistency with the research effort and their degree of 
commitment and availability.  The necessary instrumentation or facilities 
required must be shown to be adequate and any reliance on external sources, such 
as Government Furnished Equipment or Facilities, addressed (Section 5.17).

Factor 3. Effectiveness of the Proposed Work Plan
The work plan will be reviewed for its comprehensiveness, effective use of 
available resources, cost management and proposed schedule for meeting the 
Phase-I objectives.  The methods planned to achieve each objective or task 
should be discussed in detail.  

Factor 4. Commercial Merit and Feasibility
The proposal will be evaluated for any potential commercial applications in the 
private sector or for use by the Federal Government.

Scoring of Factors and Weighting: Factors 1, 2 and 3 will be scored numerically 
with Factor 1 worth 50 percent and Factors 2 and 3 each worth 25 percent. The 
sum of the scores for Factors 1, 2, and 3 will comprise the Technical Merit 
score. The score for Commercial Merit will be in the form of an adjectival 
rating (Excellent, Very Good, Average, Below Average, Poor, Insufficient Data).  
For Phase 1 proposals, Technical Merit carries more weight than Commercial 
Merit. 

4.1.3 Selection.  After a proposal is reviewed based on the stated evaluation 
criteria, it will be ranked relative to all other proposals.  Selection 
decisions will consider the recommendations from all Centers, Strategic 
Enterprises, overall NASA priorities, and program balance.  The SBIR Source 
Selection Official has the final authority for choosing the specific proposals 
for contract negotiation.

Firms selected for negotiations that may lead to an award will be notified by e-
mail.  The list of selections will be announced in a NASA press release and will 
also be posted on the NASA SBIR/STTR web site (http://sbir.nasa.gov).  Selected 
firms will receive a formal notification letter that identifies the Contracting 
Officer at the NASA Center responsible for negotiating the Phase-I contract.

4.2 Phase-II Proposals

4.2.1 Evaluation Process.  The Phase-II evaluation process is similar to the 
Phase-I process.  Each proposal will be reviewed by NASA scientists and 
engineers and by qualified experts outside of NASA as needed.  In addition, 
those proposals with high technical merit will be reviewed for commercial merit.  
NASA uses a peer review panel to evaluate commercial merit.  Panel membership 
will include non-NASA personnel experts in business development and technology 
commercialization.

4.2.2 Evaluation Factors.  The evaluation of Phase-II proposals under this 
Solicitation will apply the following factors:

Factor 1. Scientific/Technical Merit and Feasibility 
The proposed R/R&D effort will be evaluated on its innovativeness, originality, 
and technical payoff potential if successful, including the degree to which 
Phase-I objectives were met, the feasibility of the innovation, and whether the 
Phase-I results indicate a Phase-II project is appropriate.

Factor 2. Future Importance and Value to NASA
The eventual value of the product, process, or technology results to the NASA 
mission will be assessed.

Factor 3. Capability of the Small Business Concern  
NASA will assess the capability of the SBC to conduct Phase-II based on (a) the 
validity of the project plans for achieving the stated goals; (b) the 
qualifications and ability of the project team (Principal Investigator/Project 
Manager, company staff, consultants and subcontractors) relative to the proposed 
research; and (c) the availability of any required equipment and facilities.

	Factor 4. Commercial Potential.  Consideration will be given to the 
following:

		(1) Commercial potential of the technology: This includes an 
assessment of the offeror's ability to demonstrate: (a) a specific, well-defined 
commercial product or service based on the technology to be developed; (b) a 
realistic target market niche of sufficient size; (c) that the targeted 
commercial product or service has strong potential for uniquely meeting a well-
defined need within the target market niche; and (d) a commitment of significant 
private financial, physical, and technical personnel resources.

		(2) Demonstrated commercial intent of the offeror: This includes an 
assessment of:  (a) the importance of the targeted commercial venture to the 
offeror's current business and strategic planning; (b) a targeted commercial 
venture that does not rely on continued U.S. Government markets; and (c) the 
adequacy of all resource commitments for Phase-III development of the technology 
to a state of readiness for commercial application.

		(3) Capability of the offeror to bring successfully developed 
technology to commercial application: This includes assessment of the offeror's 
ability to demonstrate: (a) the offeror's past success in bringing SBIR and 
other innovative technologies to commercial application; (b) well-thought-out 
business planning; (c) strong likelihood of the offeror's bringing the remaining 
necessary private financial, physical, personnel and other resources to bear in 
a timely way to achieve commercial application of the technology in the not 
too distant term subsequent to Phase-II; and (d) the strength of the current and 
continued financial viability of the offeror.

In applying these commercial criteria, NASA will assess proposal information in 
terms of credibility, objectivity, reasonableness of key assumptions, 
independent corroborating evidence, internal consistency, demonstrated awareness 
of key risk areas and critical business vulnerabilities, and other indicators of 
sound business analysis and judgment.

4.2.3 Evaluation and Selection.  Factors 1, 2, and 3 will be scored numerically 
with Factor 1 worth 50 percent and Factors 2 and 3 each worth 25 percent. The 
sum of the scores for Factors 1, 2, and 3 will comprise the Technical Merit 
score.  Proposals receiving high numerical scores will be evaluated and rated 
for their commercial potential using the criteria listed in Factor 4 and by 
applying the same adjectival ratings as set forth for Phase-I proposals. 

Each NASA Installation managing Phase-I projects will use these factors to 
evaluate the Phase-II proposals it receives that are responsive to the Phase-II 
RFP.  Final selections will be based on recommendations from all Installations 
and Strategic Enterprises; assessments of project value to NASA's overall 
programs and plans; and any other evaluations or assessments (particularly of 
commercial potential) that may become available to the Source Selection 
Official.
 
4.3 Debriefing of Unsuccessful Offerors

After Phase-I and Phase-II selection decisions have been announced, debriefings 
for unsuccessful proposals will be available to the offeror's corporate official 
or designee via e-mail.  Telephone requests for debriefings will not be 
accepted.  Debriefings are not opportunities to reopen selection decisions.  
They are intended to acquaint the offeror with perceived strengths and 
weaknesses of the proposal and perhaps identify constructive future action by 
the offeror.  

Debriefings will not disclose the identity of the proposal evaluators nor 
provide proposal scores, rankings in the competition, or the content of, or 
comparisons with other proposals.

4.3.1 Phase-I Debriefings.  For Phase-I proposals, any request for a debriefing 
must be made via e-mail to sbir@reisys.com, within 60 days after the selection 
announcement.  Late requests will not be honored.
 
4.3.2 Phase-II Debriefings.  To request debriefings on Phase-II proposals, 
offerors must request via e-mail to the Procurement Point of Contact at the 
appropriate NASA Center (not the SBIR/STTR Program Manager) within 60 days after 
selection announcement.  Late requests will not be honored. 

5.  Considerations

5.1 Awards

5.1.1 Availability of Funds.  Both Phase-I and Phase-II awards are subject to 
availability of funds.  NASA has no obligation to make any specific number of 
Phase-I or Phase-II awards based on this Solicitation, and may elect to make 
several or no awards in any specific technical topic or subtopic.

NASA plans to announce the selection of approximately 290 proposals resulting 
from this Solicitation, for negotiation of Phase-I contracts with values not 
exceeding $70,000.  Following contract negotiations and awards, Phase-I 
contractors will have up to 6 months to carry out their programs, prepare their 
final reports, and submit Phase-II proposals.  NASA intends that all Phase-I 
projects selected will be placed under contract by mid-December 2000.

NASA anticipates that approximately 40 percent of the successfully completed 
Phase-I projects from the SBIR 2000 Solicitation will be selected for Phase-II.  
Phase-II agreements are fixed-price contracts with performance periods not 
exceeding 24 months and funding not exceeding $600,000.

5.1.2 Contracting.  Fixed-price contracts will be issued for Phase-I. Simplified 
contract documentation is employed.  SBCs selected for negotiation of contract 
awards can reduce processing time by examining the procurement documents, 
furnishing the contracting officer with signed representations and 
certifications, and indicating any contract terms to be negotiated or agreement 
with the contract terms.  NASA will make the Phase-I model contract and other 
documents available to the public on the NASA SBIR/STTR homepage 
(http://sbir.nasa.gov) at the time of selection announcement.  From the time of 
proposal selection until the award of a contract, only the Contracting Officer 
is authorized to commit the Government, and all communications must be through 
the Contracting Officer.

NASA is not responsible for any monies expended by the offeror before award of 
any contract resulting from this Solicitation.

5.2 Phase-I Reporting

An interim progress report is required when the invoice is submitted at project 
mid-point in accordance with the payment schedule (Section 5.3).  This report 
shall document progress made on the project and activities required for 
completion to provide NASA the basis for determining whether the payment is 
warranted.

A final report must be submitted to NASA upon completion of the Phase-I R/R&D 
effort in accordance with contract provisions.  It shall elaborate the project 
objectives, work carried out, results obtained, and assessments of technical 
merit and feasibility.  The final report shall include a single page proposal 
summary as the first page, in a format provided in the Phase-I contract, 
identifying the purpose of the R/R&D effort and describing the findings and 
results, including the degree to which the Phase-I objectives were achieved, and 
whether the results justify Phase-II continuation.  The potential applications 
of the project results in Phase-III either for NASA or commercial purposes 
shall also be described.  The proposal summary is to be submitted without 
restriction for NASA publication.  

5.3 Payment Schedule for Phase-I

Payments can be authorized as follows: one-third at the time of award, one-third 
at project mid-point after award, and the remainder upon acceptance of the final 
report by NASA.  The first two payments will be made 30 days after receipt of 
valid invoices.  The final payment will be made 30 days after acceptance of the 
final report and other deliverables as required by the contract.  Electronic 
funds transfer will be employed and offerors will be required to submit account 
data if selected for contract negotiations.

5.4 Proprietary Information

It is NASA's policy to use information (data) included in proposals for 
evaluation purposes only.  Public release of information in any proposal 
submitted will be subject to existing statutory and regulatory requirements.  If 
information consisting of a trade secret, proprietary commercial or financial 
information, or private personal information is provided in an SBIR proposal, 
NASA will treat in confidence the proprietary information provided the following 
legend appears on the title page of the proposal:

"For any purpose other than to evaluate the proposal, this data shall not be 
disclosed outside the Government and shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed 
in whole or in part, provided that if a funding agreement is awarded to the 
offeror as a result of or in connection with the submission of this data, the 
Government shall have the right to duplicate, use or disclose the data to the 
extent provided in the funding agreement.  This restriction does not limit the 
Government's right to use information contained in the data if it is obtained 
from another source without restriction.  The data subject to this restriction 
are contained in pages _____ of this proposal."

Do not label the entire proposal proprietary.  The Proposal Summary (Form 9B) 
should not contain proprietary information.

5.5 Non-NASA Reviewers

In addition to Government personnel, NASA at its discretion and in accordance 
with 18-15.413-2 of the NASA FAR Supplement, may utilize qualified individuals 
from outside the Government in the proposal review process.  Any decision to 
obtain an outside evaluation shall take into consideration requirements for the 
avoidance of organizational or personal conflicts of interest and the 
competitive relationship, if any, between the prospective contractor or 
subcontractor(s) and the prospective outside evaluator.  Any such evaluation 
will be under agreement with the evaluator that the information (data) contained 
in the proposal will be used only for evaluation purposes and will not be 
further disclosed.

5.6 Release of Proposal Information

In submitting a proposal, the offeror agrees to permit the Government to 
disclose publicly the information contained on the Proposal Cover (Form 9A) and 
the Proposal Summary (Form 9B).  Other proposal information (data) is considered 
to be the property of the offeror, and NASA will protect it from public 
disclosure to the extent permitted by law. 

5.7 Final Disposition of Proposals

The Government retains ownership of proposals accepted for evaluation, and such 
proposals will not be returned to the offeror.  Copies of all evaluated Phase-I 
proposals will be retained for one year after the Phase-I selections have been 
made, after which time unsuccessful proposals will be destroyed.  Successful 
proposals will be retained in accordance with contract file regulations.  

5.8 Rights in Data Developed Under SBIR Contracts

Rights to data used in, or first produced under, any Phase-I or Phase-II 
contract are specified in the clause at FAR 52.227-20, Rights in Data--SBIR 
Program.  The clause provides for rights consistent with the following:

5.8.1 Non-Proprietary Data.  Some data of a general nature are to be furnished 
to NASA without restriction (i.e., with unlimited rights) and may be published 
by NASA.  These data will normally be limited to the project summaries 
accompanying any periodic progress reports and the final reports required to be 
submitted.  The requirement will be specifically set forth in any contract 
resulting from this Solicitation.

5.8.2 Proprietary Data.  When data that is required to be delivered under an 
SBIR contract qualifies as "proprietary," i.e., either data developed at private 
expense that embody trade secrets or are commercial or financial and 
confidential or privileged, or computer software developed at private expense 
that is a trade secret, the contractor, if the contractor desires to continue 
protection of such proprietary data, shall not deliver such data to the 
Government, but instead shall deliver form, fit, and function data.

5.8.3 Non-Disclosure Period.  The Government, for a period of 4 years from 
acceptance of all items to be delivered under an SBIR contract, shall use SBIR 
data, i.e., data first produced by the contractor in performance of the 
contract, where such data are not generally known, and which data without 
obligation as to its confidentiality have not been made available to others by 
the contractor or are not already available to the Government, agrees to use 
these data for Government purposes.  These data shall not be disclosed outside 
the Government (including disclosure for procurement purposes) during the 4-year 
period without permission of the contractor, except that such data may be 
disclosed for use by support contractors under an obligation of confidentiality.  
After the 4-year period, the Government has a royalty-free license to use, and 
to authorize others to use on its behalf, these data for Government purposes, 
but the Government is relieved of all disclosure prohibitions and assumes no 
liability for unauthorized use by third parties.

5.9 Copyrights

Subject to certain licenses granted by the contractor to the Government, the 
contractor receives copyright to any data first produced by the contractor in 
the performance of an SBIR contract.

5.10 Patents

The contractor may normally elect title to any inventions made in the 
performance of an SBIR contract.  The Government receives a nonexclusive license 
to practice or have practiced for or on behalf of the Government each such 
invention throughout the world.  To the extent authorized by 35 U.S.C. 205, the 
Government will not make public any information disclosing such inventions for a 
reasonable time to allow the contractor to file a patent application.

5.11 Cost Sharing

Cost sharing is permitted, but not required for proposals under this 
Solicitation. Cost sharing, if included, should be shown in the summary budget 
but not in items labeled "AMOUNT REQUESTED." No profit will be paid on the 
cost-sharing portion of the contract

5.12 Profit or Fee

Both Phase-I and Phase-II SBIR contracts may include a reasonable profit.  The 
reasonableness of proposed profit is determined by the Contracting Officer 
during contract negotiations. 

5.13 Joint Ventures and Limited Partnerships

Both joint ventures and limited partnerships are permitted, provided the entity 
created qualifies as a SBC in accordance with the definition in Section 2.1.  A 
statement of how the workload will be distributed, managed, and charged should 
be included in the proposal.  A copy or comprehensive summary of the joint 
venture agreement or partnership agreement should be appended to the proposal.  
This will not count as part of the 25 page limit for the Phase-I proposal.

5.14 Similar Awards and Prior Work

If an award is made pursuant to a proposal submitted under this Program 
Solicitation, the firm will be required to certify that it has not previously 
been paid nor is currently being paid for essentially equivalent work by any 
agency of the Federal Government.  Failure to acknowledge or report similar or 
duplicate efforts can lead to the termination of contracts or other actions.

5.15 Contractor Commitments

Upon award of a contract, the contractor will be required to make certain legal 
commitments through acceptance of numerous clauses in the Phase-I contract.  The 
outline that follows illustrates the types of clauses that will be included.  
This is not a complete list of clauses to be included in Phase-I contracts, nor 
does it contain specific wording of these clauses.  Copies of complete 
provisions will be made available prior to contract negotiations.

5.15.1 Standards of Work.  Work performed under the contract must conform to 
high professional standards.  Analyses, equipment, and components for use by 
NASA will require special consideration to satisfy the stringent safety and 
reliability requirements imposed in aerospace applications.

5.15.2 Inspection.  Work performed under the contract is subject to Government 
inspection and evaluation at all reasonable times.

5.15.3 Examination of Records.  The Comptroller General (or a duly authorized 
representative) shall have the right to examine any directly pertinent records 
of the contractor involving transactions related to the contract.

5.15.4 Default.  The Government may terminate the contract if the contractor 
fails to perform the contracted work.

5.15.5 Termination for Convenience.  The contract may be terminated by the 
Government at any time if it deems termination to be in its best interest, in 
which case the contractor will be compensated for work performed and for 
reasonable termination costs.

5.15.6 Disputes.  Any dispute concerning the contract that cannot be resolved by 
mutual agreement shall be decided by the contracting officer with right of 
appeal.

5.15.7 Contract Work Hours.  The contractor may not require a non-exempt 
employee to work more than 40 hours in a work week unless the employee is paid 
for overtime.

5.15.8 Equal Opportunity.  The contractor will not discriminate against any 
employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, age, sex, 
or national origin.

5.15.9 Affirmative Action for Veterans.  The contractor will not discriminate 
against any employee or applicant for employment because he or she is a disabled 
veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era.

5.15.10 Affirmative Action for Handicapped.  The contractor will not 
discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because he or she 
is physically or mentally handicapped.

5.15.11 Officials Not to Benefit.  No member of or delegate to Congress shall 
benefit from the SBIR contract.

5.15.12 Covenant Against Contingent Fees.  No person or agency has been employed 
to solicit or to secure the contract upon an understanding for compensation 
except bona fide employees or commercial agencies maintained by the contractor 
for the purpose of securing business.

5.15.13 Gratuities.  The contract may be terminated by the Government if any 
gratuities have been offered to any representative of the Government to secure 
the contract.

5.15.14 Patent Infringement.  The contractor shall report to NASA each notice or 
claim of patent infringement based on the performance of the contract.

5.15.15 American-Made Equipment and Products.  Equipment or products purchased 
under an SBIR contract must be American-made whenever possible.

5.16 Additional Information

5.16.1 Precedence of Contract Over Solicitation.  This Program Solicitation 
reflects current planning.  If there is any inconsistency between the 
information contained herein and the terms of any resulting SBIR contract, the 
terms of the contract are controlling.

5.16.2 Evidence of Contractor Responsibility.  Before award of an SBIR contract, 
the Government may request the offeror to submit certain organizational, 
management, personnel, and financial information to establish responsibility of 
the offeror.  Contractor responsibility includes all resources required for 
contractor performance, i.e., financial capability, work force, and facilities.

5.17 Property

In accordance with the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) Part 45, it is 
NASA's policy not to provide facilities (capital equipment, tooling, test and 
computer facilities, etc.) for the performance of work under contract.  An SBC 
will furnish its own facilities to perform the proposed work as an indirect cost 
to the contract.  Special tooling required for a project may be allowed as a 
direct cost.

When an SBC cannot furnish its own facilities to perform required tasks, an SBC 
may propose to acquire the use of commercially available facilities.  Rental or 
lease costs may be considered as direct costs as part of the total funding for 
the project.  If unique requirements force an offeror to acquire facilities 
under a NASA contract, they will be purchased as Government Furnished Equipment 
(GFE) and titled to the Government. 

An offeror may propose the use of unique or one-of-a-kind NASA facilities if 
essential for the research.  Offerors requiring a NASA facility must clearly 
document and certify that there is no commercially available facility to 
perform the R&D.  It may be difficult, however, to ensure availability, and non-
availability may lead to non-selection.  Should an offeror propose the use of 
unique or one-of-a-kind NASA facilities essential for the R/R&D, an agreement 
with the responsible installation is required and costs fortheir use will be 
determined by the installation.  These costs may be chargeable in accordance 
with the Government property clause of the contract.  Total contract costs must 
not exceed the Phase-I and Phase-II funding limits given in this Solicitation 
(Section 5.1).

6.  Submission of Proposals

6.1 The Submission Process

6.1.1 Submission Requirements.  NASA utilizes an electronic process for 
management of the SBIR program.  This management approach requires that a 
proposing firm have Internet access via the World Wide Web, and an e-mail 
address. 

6.1.2 What Needs to Be Submitted.  A proposal submission is comprised of two 
parts: 

1. Internet Submission.  The entire proposal including Forms 9A, 9B and 9C 
must be submitted via the Internet. (http://sbir.nasa.gov) 
2. Postal Submission.  Postal submission includes an original signed proposal 
with all forms plus three copies. 

Firms not able to obtain Internet access must request an exemption by calling 
301-286-5661 or 301-937-0888 by Friday, June 30, 2000. 

Note:  Other forms of submissions such as facsimile or e-mail attachment are not 
acceptable.

6.2 Internet Submission 

6.2.1 Electronic Technical Proposal Preparation.  The term "Technical Proposal" 
refers to the part of the submission as described in Section 3.2.4.

Word Processor.  NASA converts all technical proposal files to PDF format for 
evaluation purposes.  Therefore, NASA requests that technical proposals be 
submitted in PDF format, and encourages companies to do so.  Other acceptable 
formats for PC are AmiPro, ClarisWorks for Windows, MS Works, Text, MS Word, 
WordPerfect, Postscript, and Adobe Acrobat.  For Macintosh, the acceptable 
formats are ClarisWorks, MS Works, MacWrite Pro, Text, MS Word, WordPerfect, 
Postscript, and Adobe Acrobat.  Unix and TeX users please note that due to PDF 
difficulties with non-standard fonts, please output technical proposal files in 
DVI format. 

Graphics.  The offeror is encouraged for reasons of space conservation and 
simplicity, but not required, to embed graphics within the word processed 
document.  For graphics submitted as separate files, the acceptable file formats 
(and their respective extensions) are: Bit-Mapped (.bmp), Graphics Interchange 
Format (.gif), JPEG (.jpg), PC Paintbrush (.pcx), WordPerfect Graphic (.wpg), 
and Tagged-Image Format (.tif).  

Limitations.  While only the paper copy will be screened for administrative 
compliance, the various files comprising the electronic version are required to 
exactly reflect the paper version. 

Virus Check.  The offeror is responsible for performing a virus check on each 
submitted technical proposal.  As a standard part of entering the proposal into 
the processing system, NASA will scan each submitted electronic technical 
proposal for viruses.  The detection, by NASA, of a virus on any submitted 
electronic technical proposal, may cause rejection of the proposal. 

6.2.2 Electronic Handbook.  An Electronic Handbook for submitting proposals via 
the internet is hosted on the NASA SBIR/STTR Homepage (http://sbir.nasa.gov).  
The handbook will electronically guide the firms through the various steps 
required for submitting an SBIR proposal and issue secure-user identification 
and passwords for each submission.  Communication between NASA and the firm will 
be via a combination of electronic handbooks and e-mail. 

Note:  After the offeror has submitted Forms 9A, 9B, and 9C via the Internet, 
the offeror should use the handbook to print the three forms locally.  These 
forms must be signed as appropriate and included in the postal submission.

6.3 Postal Submission

Postal Submissions are comprised of: 

1. One original signed paper copy of the proposal, including paper copies of 
all original forms (as stated in Section 3.2.2) 
2. Three additional paper copies of the entire proposal.  Each proposal copy 
is to be stapled separately. 

6.3.1 Physical Packaging Requirements for Paper Copies of Proposal.  Do not use 
bindings or special covers.  Staple the pages of each copy of the proposal in 
the upper left-hand corner only.  Secure packaging is mandatory.  NASA cannot 
process proposals damaged in transit.  All items for any proposal must be sent 
in the same envelope.  If more than one proposal is being submitted, each 
proposal must be in its own envelope, but all proposals may be sent in the same 
package.  Do not send duplicate packages of any proposal as "insurance" that at 
least one will be received. 

A checklist is included in this Solicitation to assist the offeror in submitting 
a complete proposal.  The checklist should not be submitted with the proposal.

6.3.2 Where to Send Proposals.  All proposals that are mailed through the U.S. 
Postal Service first class, registered, or certified mail; proposals sent by 
express mail or commercial delivery services; or hand-carried proposals must be 
delivered to the following address between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. EDT: 

NASA SBIR/STTR Program Support Office
REI Systems, Inc 
4041 Powder Mill Road
Suite 311
Calverton, MD 20705-3106

The telephone number 301-937-0888 may be used when required for reference by 
delivery services:

6.3.3 Deadline for Proposal Receipt.  All proposal submissions (both internet 
and postal) must be received no later than 5:00 p.m. EDT on Friday, July 14, 
2000 at the NASA SBIR/STTR Program Support Office.  Any proposal received after 
that date and time shall be considered late and handled accordingly.   

Note:  The server/electronic handbook will not be available for internet 
submissions after 5:00 p.m. EDT on Friday, July 14, 2000.

6.4 Acknowledgment of Proposal Receipt

NASA will acknowledge receipt of proposals to the SBC Official's e-mail address 
as provided on the proposal cover sheet.  If a proposal acknowledgment is not 
received within 15 days following the closing date of this Solicitation, the 
offeror should call NASA SBIR/STTR Program Support Office at 301-937-0888.  
Information about proposal status will not be available until final selections 
are announced.

6.5 Withdrawal of Proposals

Proposals may be withdrawn by written notice, signed by the designated SBC 
Official.  Withdrawal notice must include proposal number and title.

7.  Scientific and Technical Information Sources

7.1 NASA SBIR/STTR Homepage

Detailed information on NASA's SBIR Program is available at: 
http://sbir.nasa.gov.

7.2 NASA Commercial Technology Network

The NASA Commercial Technology Network (NCTN) contains a significant amount of 
on-line information about the NASA Commercial Technology Program.  The address 
for the NCTN homepage is: http://nctn.hq.nasa.gov/

7.3 NASA Technology Utilization Services

The National Technology Transfer Center (NTTC), sponsored by NASA in cooperation 
with other Federal agencies, serves as a national resource for technology 
transfer and commercialization.  NTTC has a primary role to get Government 
research into the hands of U.S. businesses.  Its gateway services make it easy 
to access databases and to contact experts in your area of research and 
development.  For further information, call 800-678-6882.

NASA's network of Regional Technology Transfer Centers (RTTCs) provides business 
planning and development services.  However, NASA does not accept responsibility 
for any services these centers may offer in the preparation of proposals.  RTTCs 
can be contacted directly as listed below to determine what services are 
available and to discuss fees charged.  Alternatively, to contact any RTTC call 
800-472-6785.

Northeast:
    Center for Technology Commercialization
    Massachusetts Technology Park
    1400 Computer Drive
    Westboro, MA  01581-5054
    Phone: 508-870-0042
    URL:    http://www.ctc.org

Mid-Atlantic:
    Mid-Atlantic Technology Applications Center
    University of Pittsburgh
    3400 Forbes Avenue, 5th Floor
    Pittsburgh, PA  15260
    Phone: 412-383-2500
    URL: http://www.mtac.pitt.edu/WWW/

Southeast:
    Southern Technology Applications Center
    University of Florida, College of Engineering
    1900 SW 34th Street, Suite 206
    Gainesville, FL   32608-1260
    Phone: 352-294-7822
    URL:  http://www.state.fl.us/stac

Mid-West:
    Great Lakes Industrial Technology Center
    Battelle Memorial Institute
    25000 Great Northern Corporate Center, Suite 450
    Cleveland, OH  44070-5310
    Phone: 440-734-0094
    URL:   http://www.battelle.org/glitec

Mid-Continent:
    Mid-Continent Technology Transfer Center
    Texas Engineering Extension Service
    Technology & Economic Development Division
    College Station, TX  77843-8000
    Phone: 409-845-2913
    URL:   http://www.mcttc.com/

Far-West:
    Far-West Technology Transfer Center
    University of Southern California
    3716 South Hope Street, Suite 200
    Los Angeles, CA  90007-4344
    Phone: 800-642-2872
    URL:   http://www.usc.edu/dept/engineering/TTC/NASA

7.4 United States Small Business Administration

The Policy Directives for the SBIR Program, which also state the SBA policy for 
this Solicitation, may be obtained from the following source.  SBA information 
can also be obtained at: http://www.sba.gov/.

Office of Innovation, Research and Technology
U.S. Small Business Administration
409 Third Street, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20416
Phone: 202-205-7701

7.5 National Technical Information Service

The National Technical Information Service, an agency of the Department of 
Commerce, is the Federal Government's central clearinghouse for publicly funded 
scientific and technical information.  For information about their various 
services and fees, call or write:

National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, VA 22161
Phone: 800-553-6847
URL:  http://www.ntis.gov

 



8.  Research Topics

Introduction

The SBIR Program Solicitation is aligned with the established NASA management 
structure of the Strategic 
Enterprises (http://www.nasa.gov).

The Enterprises identify, at the most fundamental level, what NASA does and for 
whom.  Each Strategic Enterprise is analogous to a strategic business unit 
employed by private-sector companies to focus on and respond to their customers' 
needs.  Each Strategic Enterprise has a unique set of goals, objectives, and 
strategies.  Research topics and subtopics in this Solicitation are organized by 
the four NASA Strategic Enterprises:

Aero-Space Technology
Human Exploration and Development of Space
Earth Science
Space Science

In addition, synergy among the non-Aero-Space Technology Enterprises is captured 
in a separate section in the Solicitation called:
Cross Enterprise


8.1 AERO-SPACE TECHNOLOGY

NASA's Aero-Space Technology Enterprise pioneers the identification, 
development, verification, transfer, application, and commercialization of high-
payoff aeronautics technologies.  It seeks to promote economic growth and 
security and to enhance U.S. competitiveness through safe, superior, and 
environmentally compatible U.S. civil and military aircraft and through a safe, 
efficient national aviation system.  In addition, the Enterprise recognizes that 
the space transportation industry can benefit significantly from the transfer of 
aviation technologies and flight operations to launch vehicles, the goal being 
reducing the cost of access to space.  The Enterprise will work closely with its 
aeronautics customers, including U.S. industry, the Department of Defense, and 
the Federal Aviation Administration, to ensure that its technology products and 
services add value, are timely, and have been developed to the level where the 
customer can confidently make decisions regarding the application of those 
technologies.

http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/aero

01 AVIATION SAFETY	
01.01 Aircraft Icing Systems	
01.02 Propulsion Airframe Failure Data Accident Mitigation	
01.03 Flight Deck Situation Awareness and Crew Systems Technologies	
01.04 Automated On-Line Health Management and Data Analysis	
01.05 Non-Destructive Evaluation and Health Monitoring of Materials and 
Structures	
02 ENVIRONMENTAL COMPATIBILITY
02.01 Airframe Systems Noise Prediction and Reduction	
02.02 Propulsion System Emissions and Noise Prediction and Reduction	
03 SPACE ACCESS AND TRANSPORTATION	
03.01 Advanced Launch Vehicle Systems	
03.02 Revolutionary Space Propulsion Technologies	
03.03 Lightweight Engine Components	
03.04 Hypersonic Vehicle Design and Systems Technology	
03.05 Reusable Launch Vehicle Airframe Technologies	
03.06 Launch Vehicle Manufacturing Technologies	
03.07 Space Propulsion Systems Test Operations	
04 SMALL AIRCRAFT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM	
04.01 Small Aircraft Transportation System Technologies	
04.02 Small Aircraft Transportation System Propulsion Technologies	
05 AERO-SPACE VEHICLE DESIGN TOOLS	
05.01 Modeling and Control of Complex Flows Over Aerospace Vehicles and 
Propulsion Systems	
05.02 Modeling and Simulation of Aerospace Vehicles in a Flight Test Environment
06 ADVANCED CONCEPTS AND EXPERIMENTAL FLIGHT RESEARCH	
06.01 Revolutionary Aerospace Vehicle Systems Concepts	
06.02 Revolutionary Technologies and Components for Turbine Based Combined 
Cycles	
06.03 Flight Sensors, Sensor Arrays, and Airborne Instruments for Flight 
Research	
07 AVIATION SYSTEM THROUGH-PUT	
07.01 Advanced Concepts in Air and Space Traffic Management	
07.02 Rotorcraft/STOVL Aerodynamics and Dynamics	


01 Aviation Safety 

NASA is responsible for conducting the research that, upon implementation, will 
contribute to a five-fold reduction in aviation accidents by 2007, and a ten-
fold reduction in aviation accidents by 2017.  Accomplishment of these goals 
require technical advances in the following areas: 1) Increased level of safety 
for all aircraft flying in an atmospheric icing environment; 2) Prevention 
and/or mitigation of hazardous conditions during or after an aviation accident; 
3) Enhanced flight deck situational awareness for the National Airspace System 
operators; 4) Automated on-line health management and data analysis; 5) 
Innovative and commercially viable techniques for non-destructive evaluation and 
health monitoring of materials and structures. 

01.01 Aircraft Icing Systems 
Lead Center: GRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

A major goal of the NASA Aircraft Icing Project is to increase the level of 
safety for all aircraft flying in the atmospheric icing environment.  To 
maximize the level of safety, aircraft must be capable of handling all possible 
icing conditions by either avoiding or tolerating the conditions.  Proposals are 
invited that lead to innovative new approaches or significant improvements in 
existing technologies for inflight icing condition avoidance (icing weather 
information systems) or tolerance (aircraft icing protection systems and design 
tools).  Creative teaming arrangements are encouraged to help meet proposal 
objectives.  Of particular interest are technologies that are compatible with 
emerging aircraft designs (i.e., sensitive electronic systems, digital flight 
decks, and advanced wing designs).  Onboard systems must be aerodynamically non-
intrusive and practical.  They must consider weight, power, size, and cost for 
successful integration into aircraft.  To receive consideration for funding, all 
proposals submitted under this subtopic must demonstrate significant advantages 
over existing technologies.  The areas of greatest interest are: 

- Practical, inflight and/or ground-based, real-time remote sensing of the 
supercooled water droplet and temperature environment.  Technology must be 
capable of quantifying the environment to allow for the prediction of the 
severity of airframe icing, and to identify potential avoidance and escape 
routes, and must have practical range and cloud penetration capability. 
- Low cost and practical systems that allow the transfer of remotely sensed 
(ground-based and/or airborne) icing environment information into the existing 
aviation information infrastructure.  The system will provide the end user 
(cockpit crews, air traffic controllers, and dispatchers) access to accurate and 
timely descriptions of the remotely sensed icing environment.  These systems 
must operate such that the existing information infrastructure is not adversely 
impacted by their presence, absence, or failure.  Solutions providing coverage 
to all aircraft within range of the remote sensing system are desired over those 
that can only protect aircraft with specific equipage. 
- In situ icing environment measurement systems that can provide practical, low 
cost validation data for emerging icing weather information systems and 
atmospheric modeling.  Measured information must include location, altitude, 
cloud liquid water content, temperature, and ideally cloud particle sizing and 
phase information. Possible solutions include multiple aircraft sampling and 
radiosonde based systems. 
- Low power and low cost anti-icing systems, including technologies that protect 
composite structures.  A system must be capable of operating under all potential 
environmental conditions and should be capable of operating automatically or 
with minimal cockpit crew interaction. 
- Practical analysis tools for the integrated design and optimization of hot gas 
ice protection systems.  The tool must model the entire heat path from source to 
protected surface, including the conduction path through the surface and the 
water loading on the external surface. 

01.02 Propulsion Airframe Failure Data Accident Mitigation 
Lead Center: GRC  
Participating Center(s): LaRC 

NASA is concerned with the prevention of hazardous and accident conditions and 
the mitigation of their effects when they do occur. One emphasis is on fire.  
The prevention, detection, and suppression of fires are critical goals of 
accident mitigation. Aircraft fires represent a small number of actual 
accidents, but the number of fatalities due to in-flight, post-crash and on-
ground fires is large.  Recent advances have made significant progress for cabin 
fire safety (e.g., fire-blocking layers in seat cushions); however, new areas of 
aircraft fire research have been identified (e.g., fuel tank flammability 
reduction). 

A second emphasis is on crashworthiness.  For all transport aircraft accidents, 
45 percent of those which involve serious injuries or fatalities are survivable.  
Besides impact alone, survivability is often a function of the combined effects 
of subsequent fire and smoke.  Technology is needed to further protect 
passengers from the effects of the crash or mitigate the after effects to allow 
the escape of passengers. 

A third emphasis is on the problems that may result from mal functions of aging 
equipment in the service of commercial transport aircraft, general aviation, and 
commercial rotorcraft.  Because of the needs of increased competition and growth 
in passenger and cargo traffic, the service lives of dependable aircraft models 
are being extended.  Current inspection and overhaul programs focus almost 
exclusively on structural integrity and the effects of structural corrosion and 
fatigue.  However, much less attention is given to the potential effects of age 
on non-structural components, which include electrical wiring; connectors, 
wiring harnesses, and cables; fuel, hydraulic and pneumatic lines; and electro-
mechanical systems such as pumps, sensors, and actuators.  Deterioration of 
aircraft components, particularly wiring and electrical equipment, is also 
linked to breakdowns and unanticipated ignition sources that can cause fires in 
aircraft flight. 

A final emphasis for this Solicitation is on propulsion system health management 
in order to prevent or accommodate safety-significant malfunctions.  Past 
advances in this area have helped improve the reliability and safety of aircraft 
propulsion systems.  However, propulsion system component failures are still a 
contributing factor in numerous aircraft accidents and incidents.  Advances in 
instrumentation, health monitoring algorithms, and fault accommodating logic are 
sought which help to further reduce the occurrence of and/or mitigate the 
effects of safety-significant propulsion system malfunctions. 

With these emphases in mind, products and technologies are sought to enhance 
human survivability in the event of an accident, to assure continued 
airworthiness of the aging aircraft, and to monitor system health.  
Considerations should be made for affordability and retrofitability to the 
commercial transport, general aviation, and rotorcraft fleets.  These include 
the following areas: 

- Technology for fire prevention, detection, and suppression of potential 
in-flight fires in fuel tanks, insulation, cargo compartments, and other 
inaccessible locations. 
- Technology to provide fuel tank flammability reduction and on-board oxygen 
generation. 
- Technology to minimize fire hazards in crashes and to prevent or delay 
fires.  For example: fuel-system modifications to eliminate spills, and on-
demand suppression while not presenting a weight or performance 
penalty. 
- Design and injury criteria and dynamic analyses to enhance crash safety. 
- Systems approach to crashworthy designs, which may include validated 
occupant/seat/structural interaction analyses. 
- Energy-absorbing seat and structural concepts and materials. 
- Technology for occupant protection in a crash, including advanced 
restraints and supplemental restraints. 
- Concepts to extend the useful safe life of airframe structures and non-
structural systems. 
- Advanced non-destructive evaluation (NDE) techniques that can be field 
demonstrated for aging engines. 
- NDE-based material and structural modeling that can be integrated in life 
models for remaining life assessment of airframe and engine components. 
- Concepts to prevent catastrophic failures of engine components, or to 
ensure fragment containment. 
- Health management technologies such as advanced instrumentation, health 
monitoring algorithms, and fault accommodating logic, to predict, diagnose, and 
prevent safety significant propulsion system malfunctions. 
- Low cost methods for failure prediction and testing of the above aircraft 
failure-prevention and mitigation technologies. 
- Methods for integration of the above aircraft failure-prevention and 
mitigation technologies into existing or new aircraft. 

01.03 Flight Deck Situation Awareness and Crew Systems Technologies 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Information technology has and will continue to provide operational 
opportunities toward increasing the safe and efficient use of the Airspace 
System.  Significant challenges associated with this evolving technology include 
maintaining or enhancing the situation awareness of system operators, developing 
user-centered technologies that facilitate human perception and interpretation 
and that counteract human information processing limitations and biases, and 
allowing for geographically and temporally distributed operators to work 
collaboratively. 

NASA seeks highly innovative crew systems technologies that will maintain or 
enhance situation awareness and aid operator decision-making for improved 
aerospace safety and efficiency.  These technologies and methods may take 
the form of tools, models, techniques, procedures, substantiated guidelines, 
prototypes, and devices.  In addition, we seek tools and methods for measuring 
and analyzing human and group performance in complex, dynamic systems.  
Innovative and economically attractive approaches are sought to advance the 
current state of the art in the following areas:
 
- Systems monitoring with sensitive informing, advisements, alerts, and aids 
for Airspace System operators that enhance situation awareness and improve 
aviation safety. 
- Crew-centered systems design methods and technologies. 
- Innovative crew-system interface technologies. 
- Human-error reduction in aircraft operations and systems monitoring.
- Error tolerant flight deck systems including advanced displays, crew-
system interfaces, and monitoring technologies. 
- Human and group performance analysis methods and tools. 
- Human performance measurement technologies for use in operational 
environments.
- Collaborative and distributive decision making among Airspace System 
operators.
- Integrated flight deck information systems and procedures. 
- Decision support technologies and methods to assist Airspace System 
operators that enhance situation awareness and improve aviation safety.
- Artificial Intelligence technologies and concepts that monitor crew and 
aircraft performance to ensure appropriate levels of engagement, crew workload 
and situation awareness. 
- Human-centered information technologies that enhance situation awareness and 
performance of less experienced Airspace System operators especially at critical 
times. 
- Development of human-centered information technology for intuitive guidance 
queues in advanced concepts 
- Guidelines and measurement techniques that allow for successful assessment of 
the application of human-centered design principles to flight deck display 
concepts 

01.04 Automated On-Line Health Management and Data Analysis 
Lead Center: DFRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Online health monitoring is a critical technology for improving transportation 
safety in the 21st century.  Safe, affordable, and more efficient operation of 
aerospace vehicles requires advances in online health monitoring of vehicle 
subsystems and information monitoring from many sources over local/wide area 
networks.  On-line health monitoring is a general concept involving signal-
processing algorithms designed to support decisions related to safety, 
maintenance, or operating procedures.  The concept of on-line emphasizes 
algorithms that minimize the time between data acquisition and decision-making. 

This subtopic seeks solutions for on-line aircraft subsystem health monitoring.  
Solutions should exploit multiple computers communicating over standard networks 
where applicable.  Solutions can be designed to monitor a specific subsystem or 
a number of systems simultaneously.  Resulting commercial products might be 
implemented in a distributed decision-making environment such as a virtual 
flight research center, a disciplinary-specific collaborative laboratory, an 
onboard diagnostics system, or a maintenance and inspection network of 
potentially global proportion. 

Proposers should discuss who the users of resulting products would be, e.g., 
research/test/development; manufacturing; maintenance depots; flight crew; 
airports; flight operations or mission control; air traffic management; or 
airlines.  Proposers are encouraged to discuss data acquisition, processing, and 
presentation components in their proposal.  Examples of desired solutions 
targeted by this subtopic include: 

- Real-time autonomous sensor validity monitors. 
- Flight control system or flight path diagnostics for predicting loss of 
control. 
- Automated testing and diagnostics of mission-critical avionics. 
- Structural fatigue, life cycle, static, or dynamic load monitors. 
- Automated nondestructive evaluation for faulty structural components. 
- Electrical system monitoring and fire prevention. 
- Applications that exploit wireless communication technology to reduce costs. 
- Model-reference or model-updating schemes based on measured data that 
operate autonomously. 
- Proactive maintenance schedules for rocket or turbine engines, including 
engine life-cycle monitors. 
- Predicting or detecting any equipment malfunction. 
- Middleware or software toolkits to lower the cost of developing online 
health-monitoring applications. 
- Innovative solutions for harvesting, managing, archival, and retrieval of 
aerospace vehicle health data. 

01.05 Non-Destructive Evaluation and Health Monitoring of Materials and 
Structures 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Innovative and commercially viable concepts are being solicited for the 
development of non-destructive evaluation (NDE) and health-monitoring sensors, 
instrumentation, and computational models for signal processing and data 
interpretation to establish quantitative characterization and event 
determination.  Evaluation sciences include ultrasonics, laser ultrasonics, 
optics and fiber optics, shearography, video optics and metrology, thermography, 
electromagnetics, acoustic emission, X-ray and X-ray detectors, related 
management of digital NDE data, and biomimetic sensing approaches for structural 
health monitoring. 

- Technologies may be applied to characterizing material properties; assessing 
effects of defects in materials and structures; evaluating of mass-loss in 
materials; in situ monitoring and control of materials processing; detecting 
cracks, porosity, foreign material, inclusions, corrosion, disbonds; detecting 
cracks under bolts; and real time and in situ monitoring, reporting, and damage 
detection for structural durability and life prediction, and characterization of 
load environment on a variety of structural materials and geometries including 
thermal protection systems and bonded configurations.
- Uses include identification of loads exceeding design, monitoring loads for 
fatigue and preventing overloads, suppression of acoustic loads, and early 
detection of damage.  Applications are seen for thermal protection systems, 
adhesives, sealants, bearings, coatings, glasses, complex composite and 
hybrid structural systems, alloys, laminates, low density and high temperature 
materials, monolithics, material blends, and weldments. 
- The anticipated structural applications to be considered for NDE and health 
monitoring development include a variety of high stress and hostile aero-thermo-
chemical service environments projected for aerospace systems. There is 
additional specific interest in non-contacting, remote, rapid, and less geometry 
sensitive technologies that reduce acquisition costs or improve system 
sensitivity, stability, and operational costs. 

02 Environmental Compatibility 

NASA has very aggressive goals for providing technologies which will ensure the 
noise and emissions environmental compatibility of future commercial aircraft.  
In particular, the noise goals are to reduce the perceived noise levels of 
future aircraft by a factor of two (10 EPNdB) within ten years, and a factor of 
four (20 EPNdB) within 20 years.  The emissions goals are to reduce aircraft 
emissions by a factor of three within ten years and a factor of five within 20 
years.  These goals are necessary to meet increasingly stringent local, 
national, and international noise and emission regulations while enhancing 
operating safety and productivity and increasing aviation system throughput. 
Accomplishment of these goals will require revolutionary airframe and propulsion 
technologies be developed and handed off to the aerospace community in a timely 
fashion.  Particular areas of interest are:  Noise prediction and reduction 
technologies for propulsion source noise, nacelle aeroacoustics, airframe noise, 
and noise minimal flight procedures for future subsonic and supersonic 
commercial aircraft.  Aircraft interior noise reduction technologies to improve 
passenger and crew comfort.  Emissions reduction technologies for ultra low NOx 
emissions combustor concepts which also reduce the aerosol and particulates 
emissions.  Innovative airframe and propulsion concepts. 

02.01 Airframe Systems Noise Prediction and Reduction 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Innovative concepts, techniques, and methods are necessary for the design and 
development of efficient, environmentally acceptable airplanes, rotorcraft and 
advanced aerospace vehicles.  Improvements in noise prediction and control are 
needed for jet, propeller, rotor, fan, turbomachinery, and airframe noise 
sources to reduce the impact on community residents, aircraft passengers and 
crew, and launch vehicle payloads.  Innovations in the following specific areas 
are solicited: 

- Fundamental and applied computational fluid-dynamics techniques for 
aeroacoustic analysis, particularly for use early in the design process. 
- Concepts for active and passive control of fan, turbomachinery, and jet 
noise in engine nacelles. 
- Reduction concepts and prediction methods for rotorcraft and advanced 
propeller aerodynamic noise. 
- Reduction concepts and prediction methods for jet noise of subsonic, 
supersonic, and hypersonic aircraft. 
- Simulation and prediction of aeroacoustic noise sources including airframe 
noise and propulsion-airframe integration. 
- Computational and analytical structural acoustics techniques for aircraft and 
advanced aerospace vehicle interior noise prediction, particularly for use early 
in the airframe design process. 
- Concepts for active and passive interior noise control for aircraft and 
advanced aerospace vehicle structures. 
- Prediction and control of high-frequency aeroacoustic loads on advanced 
aerospace structures and the resulting dynamic response. 

02.02 Propulsion System Emissions and Noise Prediction and Reduction 
Lead Center: GRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Emissions: Current environmental concerns with subsonic and supersonic aircraft 
center around global warming and the impact on the earth's climate and, if not 
addressed, may threaten future market growth.  Carbon dioxide (CO2) and oxides 
of nitrogen (NOx) are the major emittants of concern coming from commercial 
aircraft engines.  CO2 is a greenhouse gas which may impact the warming of the 
earth's climate.  NOx emissions can destroy ozone in the upper atmosphere which 
protects humans from harmful uv radiation from the sun and NOx can produce ozone 
in the lower atmosphere.  Around airports, it appears as smog and causes 
breathing and health problems.  Current state-of-the-art engines and combustors 
in most subsonic aircraft are fuel efficient and meet the 1996 ICAO nitrogen 
oxide (NOx) limits.  The Kyoto Agreement is applying pressure for additional CO2 
reductions, and Europe and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency are applying 
pressure for additional NOx reductions at takeoff and possibly cruise 
conditions.  Stringent CO2 and NOx limits could result in emissions' fees or 
limited access to some countries.  Also, recent observations of aircraft exhaust 
contrails (from both subsonic and supersonic flights) have resulted in growing 
concern over aerosol, particulate, and sulfur levels in the fuel.  In 
particular, aerosols and particulates from aircraft are suspected of producing 
high altitude clouds which could adversely affect the earth's climatology. 

NASA has set some very aggressive goals for reducing emissions of future 
aircraft by a factor of three within 10 years and by a factor of five within 20 
years.  Advanced concepts research for reducing CO2 and NOx, and analytical and 
experimental research in characterization (intrusive and non-intrusive) and 
control (through component design, controls, and/or fuel additives) of gaseous, 
liquid and particulates of aircraft exhaust emissions is sought.  Specific 
aircraft operating conditions of interest include the landing-takeoff cycle as 
well as the in-flight portion of the mission.  Areas of particular interest are: 

- New concepts for reducing carbon dioxide, oxides of nitrogen (NO, NO2, NOx), 
unburned hydrocarbons; carbon monoxide, particulate, and aerosols emittants 
(novel propulsion concepts, injector designs to improve fuel mixing, catalysts, 
additives, etc.); 1. New fuels for commercial aircraft which minimize carbon 
dioxide emissions;  2. Innovative active control concepts for emission 
minimization with an integrated systems focus including emission modeling for 
control, sensing and actuation requirements, control logic development, and 
experimental validation are of interest; and 3. New instrumentation techniques 
are needed for the measurement of engine emissions such as NOx, SOx, HOx, atomic 
oxygen and hydrocarbons in combustion facilities and engines. Size, size 
distributions, reactivity, and constituents of aerosols and particulates are 
needed, as are temperature, pressure, density, and velocity measurements.  
Optical techniques that provide 2 D and 3 D data; time history measurements; and 
thin film, fiber optic, and MEMS-based sensors are of interest. 

Noise: NASA intends to provide enabling technologies to reduce the perceived 
noise levels of future aircraft by a factor of two (10 EPNdB) from 1997 
technology aircraft by 2007, and a factor of four (20 EPNdB) by 2022.  These 
goals are necessary to meet increasingly stringent local, national and 
international community noise regulations while enhancing operating safety and 
productivity and increasing aviation system throughput.  Engine noise reduction 
technologies are required in the areas of propulsion source noise, nacelle 
aeroacoustics, and engine/airframe integration.  These aggressive aircraft noise 
reduction goals will require revolutionary advances in propulsion technologies.  
Some of the key technologies needed to achieve these goals are revolutionary 
propulsion systems for reduced noise without significant increases in cost and 
emissions.  Noise reduction concepts need to be identified that provide 
economical alternatives to conventional propulsion systems.  NASA is soliciting 
proposals in one or more of the following areas for Propulsion System Noise 
Reduction: 

- Innovative acoustic source identification techniques for turbomachinery noise.  
The technique shall be described and demonstrated on a relevant source.  A 
simple source may be used where the solution is known to demonstrate the 
technique.  A clear explanation on how the technique can be applied to turbofan 
engines should be included.  The technique should be capable of identifying 
sources contributing to dominant engine components, such as fan and jet noise.  
Fan Noise: The technique shall be capable of separating fan sources such as fan-
alone versus fan/stator interaction for both tones and broadband noise.  
Sufficient resolution is needed to determine the location of the dominant 
sources on the aerodynamic surfaces.  Jet Noise: The technique shall be capable 
of locating both internal and external mixing noise for dual-flow nozzles found 
in modern turbofans. 
- Innovative turbofan source reduction techniques.  Methods shall emphasize 
noise reduction methods for fan, jet and core components without compromising 
performance for turbofan engines.  A resulting engine system that incorporates 
one or more of the proposed methods should be capable of reducing perceived 
noise levels anywhere from 10 to 20 EPNdB relative to FAR 36, Stage 3 
certification levels. 
- Revolutionary propulsion concepts for lower noise (proposed as alternatives to 
turbofan engines).  Feasibility studies shall be done that demonstrate the 
potential for 20 EPNdB engine noise reduction relative to FAR 36, Stage 3 
certification levels for commercial aircraft concepts.  Enabling technologies 
shall be identified for future research. 

03 Space Access and Transportation 

Goals include reducing the payload cost to Low Earth Orbit by an order of 
magnitude, from $10 K to $1 K per pound, within 10 years and from $1 K to $100's 
per pound by 2020.  Of paramount importance is the increase in safety and 
reliability of our space transportation systems and our goal is to increase 
flight safety by two orders of magnitude within 10 years and by four orders of 
magnitude in 20 years.  The following are some specific areas that will provide 
significant advancements.  Technologies for hardware concepts, subsystems, and 
design and analysis tools to support development of advanced launch vehicles 
while lowering operations cost.  Technologies for improvements in vehicle 
structural margins, propulsion system power densities and/or specific impulse 
over current earth-to-orbit and space propulsion systems.  Methodologies that 
emphasize justification for selection of matrix material constituents, fibers, 
interface coatings, fabric architecture, etc.  Advanced hypersonic technologies 
that could impact the design and optimization of future hypersonic vehicles.  
Airframe technologies in materials and structural concepts, validated, safe 
structural analysis and design technologies, and improved manufacture of large-
scale, advanced structures.  Thermal-structural designs for primary structures 
such as propellant tanks, intertanks, wings, and thrust structures; discrete 
load carrying systems; along with thermal management/environmental protection 
that are integrated in these systems.  Technologies for materials, processes, 
and manufacturing that will provide safe, reliable, lightweight, and less 
expensive launch vehicle and spacecraft components.  Concepts for propulsion 
test operations which support the reduction of overall propulsion test 
operations costs (recurring costs) and/or increase reliability and performance 
of propulsion ground test facilities and operations methodologies. 

03.01 Advanced Launch Vehicle Systems 
Lead Center: MSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Advanced launch vehicle systems will require high mass fraction, reliable system 
performance, and extended reusability in order to achieve cost goals.  This 
subtopic emphasizes innovative hardware concepts, subsystems, and design and 
analysis tools to support development of advanced launch vehicles while lowering 
operations cost. Methodology, design and analysis tools, and hardware developed 
under this subtopic should address technical issues related to propellant tanks, 
thermal control subsystems, thermal protection systems, structures, guidance, 
navigation, and control (GN&C), supporting discipline analysis, and launch 
vehicle systems integration issues.  Specific areas of interest for advanced 
technologies and innovations include the following: 

- Low cost designs, concepts, and manufacturing processes for tanks and 
vehicle structures; and innovative approaches and techniques to reduce small 
payload launcher costs. 
- Control and health management of vehicle structural systems by using sensors 
and effectors that have little influence on the structural system parameters 
with the exception of the structural damping parameters. Continuous estimation 
of center of mass and inertial properties.  Real-time tuning of control 
algorithms to reflect known changes in vehicle response or sensor performance, 
and accurate, continuous estimation of fuel remaining on board. 
- Advanced concepts and techniques for thermal control of vehicle subsystems 
and payload thermal accommodation. 
- Thermal protection system concepts, instrumentation analysis tools, and 
testing techniques for reusable vehicles, cryo-tanks, and vehicle base heat 
shield regions. 
- Innovative system level models that support the design, analysis, and 
integration of vehicle subsystems and propulsions systems into the vehicle (such 
as the ability to assess operability of the systems and to model the impacts of 
design changes on vehicle cost, operations, vehicle aerodynamics, and 
controllability). 
- Integrated CAD, solid-model, structural, dynamic, thermal, and fluid-flow 
analysis methods for multi-disciplinary analysis and optimization of launch 
vehicles, and vehicle subsystems; and improved vehicle analysis tools in the 
areas of stress, thermal, structural, and fluid dynamics. 
- Automated propellant management systems; and technologies and innovative 
engineering capabilities to produce propulsion storage, feed, pressurization, 
fill and drain, vent, and support/restraint systems that are robust, lighter, or 
require less volume. 
- Optimal fault detection and redundancy management strategies; onboard 
autonomous mission planning/abort mode determination; execution software and 
advanced navigation hardware/software architectures; and adaptive GN&C utilizing 
data from sensors such as GPS. 
- Advance guidance concepts that will reduce operational costs and increase 
reliability by autonomously reshaping trajectories in the presence of abort/
failure situations to satisfy vehicle and control constraints and to achieve a 
safe abort. 
- Advance control concepts that will reduce operational costs and increase 
reliability by adapting to changing missions/payloads/vehicle models/failures 
and abort scenarios without requiring ground effort for retuning and analysis. 
- Analysis and testing techniques for prediction and measurement of damage 
and stress including life prediction, progressive internal damage and dynamic 
response in structures containing ceramic-matrix, metal-matrix composites, or 
other composite materials; and nondestructive evaluation of structural integrity 
of vehicle materials and subsystems.  Methods for efficient characterization of 
frequency response functions of large structures, and analysis and testing 
techniques for passive and active vibration isolation devices for launch 
vehicles and payloads. 
- Advanced technologies for integrated structural systems such as integrated 
thermal and structural cryogenic tanks, efficient and effective repair 
techniques, technologies for modal, acoustic and static testing of large-scale 
aerospace structural systems, experimental-empirical methods for composite 
material thermal characterization and response prediction. 

03.02 Revolutionary Space Propulsion Technologies 
Lead Center: MSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

This subtopic focuses on innovative, advanced propulsion technologies, devices 
and systems that could lead to dramatic reductions in launch costs, rapid and 
affordable in-space transportation, and ambitious exploration of the solar 
system and beyond.  Technologies that offer significant improvements in vehicle 
structural margins, propulsion system power densities and/or specific impulse 
over current earth-to-orbit and space propulsion systems are sought.  Concepts 
that can be applied to high-payoff commercial applications are of particular 
interest.  Proposals should include analyses addressing feasibility and mission 
suitability, and plans for demonstrating concept feasibility via 
test/experiment.  Areas of interest include: 

- Advanced airbreathing/rocket combined cycle engines.  Technologies may 
include high-performance concepts based on non-chemical energy sources, deeply 
cooled turbojets, and liquid air cycle engines. 
- Advanced propellants and high-energy density materials.  Technologies may 
include advanced high-energy-density propellants, propellant combinations 
recovered in situ from extraterrestrial resources, and advanced cryogenic 
propellant storage/transfer techniques. 
- Beamed energy propulsion.  Technologies may include laser propelled vehicle 
systems and components, microwave energy transmission and energy conversion, and 
application of Magneto Hydro-Dynamic (MHD) interactions for thrust generation, 
drag reduction and power generation. 
- High-power electric propulsion systems.  Technologies may include high-power 
density energy sources, advanced energy conversion techniques, and pulsed 
inductive and electromagnetic plasma thrusters. 
- Fission propulsion.  Technologies may include solid-core nuclear thermal 
rocket fuels, components and systems, gas-core thermal rockets, external pulsed 
plasma propulsion, nuclear-based MHD cycles for high power density energy 
production. 
- Fusion propulsion.  Technologies may include pulsed and steady-state 
fusion propulsion concepts and systems, efficient, lightweight laser and 
particle-based drivers, lightweight thermal radiators, and hybrid fission/fusion 
concepts. 
- Solar thermal propulsion.  Technologies may include solar concentrators, 
lightweight concentrator support structures, engine/thrusters for solar energy 
conversion, and controls and pointing systems. 
- Sails.  Technologies may include solar, magnetic, laser, microwave and 
plasma sail systems, lightweight, high-strength, high-temperature materials, and 
high-power, space-based lasers. 
- Electrodynamic and momentum transfer tethers.  Technologies may include 
materials or coatings for improved performance and lifetime, designs and 
analysis for tether behavior and dynamics, and testing and characterization 
techniques.  
- Antimatter propulsion.  Technologies may include highly-efficient 
techniques for antimatter production, long-duration antimatter storage and 
transportation, and methods for utilizing antimatter as a propulsion energy 
source.
- "Breakthrough" propulsion.  Application of newly discovered scientific 
phenomena to propellantless space transportation, travel near theoretical 
velocity limits, and energy production far beyond the capabilities of known 
nuclear sources. 

03.03 Lightweight Engine Components 
Lead Center: MSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Next generation space propulsion systems must address the significant challenge 
of achieving lower life-cycle cost while increasing safety & performance 
relative to current propulsion systems.  Innovative processing methodologies and 
use of lightweight engine components offer the potential for increases in 
propulsion safety and for cost reduction.  NASA, through this subtopic, is 
seeking research proposals that:

- Justify selection of matrix material constituents, fibers, interface 
coatings, fabric architecture, etc. 
- Control processing parameters to ensure successful scale-up and 
reproducibility.
- Verify processes with microscopic analysis (e.g., microprobe, SEM, XRD, 
BET, etc.) and macroscopic analysis (e.g., tensile strength, interlaminar shear 
strength, thermal and physical properties, etc.).
- Verify specific end-use application by testing for permeability, thermal 
shock, etc., and - Evaluate components and/or coupon material nondestructively 
(NDE). 

Composites are desired composed of fibers selected by end users such as high 
strength SiC fibers, carbon fibers, and ultrahigh temperature type fibers, 
omponent health monitoring fibers, and a hybrid tow or architecture composed of 
the fibers mentioned.  Advanced fiber interface coatings yielding optimal 
composite life and composite performance with respect to cost and time for 
fabrication are desired which are resistant to hot steam & hydrogen environments 
(eg. platinum & other refractory metals & metal alloys, silicon tetra or 
hexaboride, zirconium silicide, boron carbide, multi-layers, etc.)  Matrices 
selected by end users such as silicon, zirconium, and hafnium based matrices.  
Also matrices or doped matrices composed of, or formed in situ during operation, 
hafnium silicate & zirconium silicate type matrices are desired.  Matrices that 
resist environmental erosion and reactive gas diffusion are desired. 

Proposals are sought which address the Advanced Space Transportation Program 
goals by quantifiably describing the technology advancement payoff beyond the 
state-of-the-art.  For those efforts which fabricate components, plans are 
sought which describe how the component will handle the projected or potential 
system requirements (i.e., how blisk handle hoop and interlaminar shear loads, 
how cooled or gas path parts are manifolded to metal connections, how unique 
components are joined and function, level to which thrust chambers & ducting are 
impermeable with time, etc.).  Flexible, detailed test matrices correlated to 
processing variables are also of interest in the proposal and reports.  Also, 
please note any manufacturing scale-up necessary for the target components and 
list the deliverables.  

Deliverables that are sought include: 

- Components, test data, and material analyses as appropriate. 
- Hoop or flat tensile stress-strain curves, interlaminar shear, and other 
coupon test data.
- Microscopic analysis images.
- Edge loaded tensile specimens (maximum of nine). 

When components are delivered to NASA for potential testing & analyses, possible 
means to manifold (for cooling and gas ducting) and attachment plans are sought.  
Specific areas of technology development include, but are not limited to, the 
following: 

- Development of lightweight turbomachinery components [e.g., integrally bladed 
disks (blisks), rotors, stators, housings, seals, etc.] having capability to 
operate in hot (> 1000 C) hydrogen rich steam and oxygen rich environments. 
- Development of fabrication techniques capable of producing uniform densities 
in CMC blisks for thicknesses ranging from 1 to 3 inches, and diameters up to 18 
inches. 
- Innovative technologies providing lower cost, lightweight combustion 
components (e.g., cooled and uncooled thrust chambers and nozzles, injector 
faceplates, minimal erosion throats, etc.) for LOX/H2 and LOX/RP environments. 
- Ultrahigh temperature (greater than 2000 degrees Celsius) propulsion and 
plasma confinement development for solar thermal absorbers and nuclear thermal 
applications. 
- CMC components or components lined with CMCs which can contain pressure. 
- Continuous nanofiber or microfiber preform such that the fibers are 
connected to each other in the fashion of a foam and having high nearly 
isotropic CMC tensile strength properties suitable for propulsion applications. 
- Fabrication of a simple CMC or ceramic lined turbopump housing. 
- Fabrication of a simple CMC or ceramic, impermeable, reliable turbopump 
housing. 
- Development of CMCs with preforms containing fibers aligned in principal 
stress trajectories, hybrid (fiber type & size) preforms, process & component 
operation health monitoring preforms, etc.  Characterization of CMC components 
with unique > 2D preforms. 
- Development of functionally gradient materials for preceding applications. 
- Low cost (with metrics), rapid, scalable, repeatable CMC fabrication 
processes development for preceding applications. 
- Joining of ceramic composites to CMCs and ceramics for thrust chambers, 
uncooled & cooled nozzle components, blisks, injectors, housings, & end user 
specified components accounting for ply direction and surface condition. 

All monolithic ceramic development must be justified for use on manned or 
unmanned flight vehicles.  A commitment must be obtained from end users that 
state the risks and results of impact damage to the component which are 
acceptable for the monolithic ceramic components. 

03.04 Hypersonic Vehicle Design and Systems Technology 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Innovative system-oriented research is sought to support, develop, and/or enable 
advanced hypersonic technologies that could impact the design and optimization 
of future hypersonic vehicles.  The focus is on hypersonic airbreathing vehicles 
with emphasis on hypersonic cruise airplanes and single- or two-stage-to-orbit 
vehicles.  Design/analysis software/algorithms and graphical user interfaces to 
the software to address hypersonic vehicle design and performance prediction 
needs can include the following: 

- Conceptual and preliminary design. 
- Total multidisciplinary configuration design and optimization. 
- Three-dimensional methods for external and internal vehicle/propulsion 
flowpath analyses (includes CFD and closed form methods or a combination 
thereof). 
- Vehicle sizing and scaling. 
- Subsystems design/database including sizing, integration, and networking 
routines with or without power balance capabilities. 
- Methods for design/analysis of cooled leading edges including heat load 
predictions. 
- Inverse design methods. 
- Trajectory design, analysis, and optimization. 
- Aerodynamic/aerothermodynamic performance prediction methods. 

Advanced hardware and systems with the potential to reduce structural weight 
fraction and/or increase vehicle performance are sought and can include: 

- Heat exchangers, reactors, and secondary coolant designs for endothermic fuel 
systems. 
- Propulsion cycles applicable from Mach 0 to 25 and accompanying design and 
integration techniques. 
- Heat-rejection radiators, compact, high-performance convective heat 
exchangers, and cooling panel design. 
- Lightweight, durable coating or insulation systems that can significantly 
reduce the aerothermal heat load to external/internal surfaces with those 
improvements. 
- MHD propulsion/flowpath. 
- Systems for reduction of drag at hypersonic speeds. 
- Plasma augmented propulsion. 
- Systems for reduction of aeroheating at hypersonic speeds. 
- Innovative flight controls. 
- Specialized hypersonic fuel systems. 

03.05 Reusable Launch Vehicle Airframe Technologies 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): MSFC 

Next generation space transportation systems must address the significant 
challenge of significantly reducing the cost of space access while providing 
orders-of-magnitude improvements in safety.  To accomplish these goals, the 
airframes/spaceframes for future launch vehicles and upper stages must be 
reusable and incorporate advanced technologies in materials and structural 
concepts, validated, safe structural analysis and design technologies, and 
improved manufacture of large-scale, advanced structures; and must utilize 
advanced control, health monitoring, and maintenance technologies to enable low 
cost and safe operations.  To facilitate the improvement of safety, the 
uncertainties in airframe loads, responses and failure mechanisms must also be 
reduced so that design margins that contribute to safety can be quantified with 
an accuracy much greater than is today possible.  The conflicting requirements 
of low cost and safety must also be balanced with the need for performance 
sufficient for space transportation vehicles. 

Airframe systems of primary interest in this subtopic include innovative 
concepts in reusable cryogenic propellant tanks, and "integrated thermal-
structures" (i.e., airframe structures, such as integral cryogenic tanks, 
intertanks, wings/fins, thrust structures, fairings, control surfaces and 
leading edges that are hot structures or have the reentry thermal protection 
system closely integrated with the structure).  Proposals for innovative 
research in design and mechanics, and in materials technologies addressing these 
airframe systems are solicited.  Proposals of specific interest in this subtopic 
include one or more of the following items: 

Design and Mechanics
- Specialized modeling, analysis, and design tools for integrated structural, 
thermal, thermal-structural, or acoustic responses, and innovative measurement 
and test methods for design validation.  Application of methodology to 
circular and multi-lobed, membrane cryogenic tanks, and for conformal, non-
membrane tanks is of special interest. 
- Novel methods for prediction and testing of material and structural 
durability and damage tolerance with emphasis on cryogen leakage, environmental 
degradation, combined thermal-mechanical loads, and operation beyond nominal 
design conditions; and related methods to repair damaged structures. 

Materials Technologies
- Significant advances in critical properties for high-temperature nickel, iron, 
and titanium alloys, intermetallics, refractory metals, PMC's, MMC's, and CMC's 
along with their related processing into useful product forms for fabrication 
into the airframe systems of interest. 
- Materials technologies focused on advanced, high temperature materials 
compatible with cryogenic and gaseous hydrogen and oxygen; and for composite 
tanks, focused on cryogen leakage prevention and/or detection and/or sealing. 
- Practical processing methods for large-scale manufacture of cryogenic tanks 
with efficient and reliable joining, and process development for advanced 
forming such as out-of-autoclave manufacture for composites, and near-net-shape 
and free-form fabrication for metals. 

03.06 Launch Vehicle Manufacturing Technologies 
Lead Center: MSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

NASA seeks new and innovative technologies for materials, processes, and 
manufacturing that will provide safe, reliable, lightweight, and less expensive 
launch vehicle and spacecraft components.  Advanced materials and fabrication 
processes will enable next generation advanced space transportation systems.  
Projects should focus on technologies leading to decreased cost, and reducing 
the weight of systems and components while increasing reliability and service 
life above current capabilities.  Only processes that are environmentally 
friendly and worker-health-oriented, will be considered.  Proposals in the 
following areas of interest are sought: 

- Innovative materials and manufacturing technologies that utilize advanced 
polymer matrix composite materials. Areas of interest include, but are not 
limited to: 
- Large scale manufacturing 
- Non-autoclave curing; especially automated fabrication techniques using e-
beam, and thermoplastics 
- Technologies for providing damage tolerant and repairable structures 
- Development of materials and manufacturing processes compatible with 
Fuels/Oxidizers 
- Developments in "Intelligent Synthesis Environment" and collaborative 
engineering tools for manufacturing. Emphasis is placed on: 
- "The Manufacturing Element" of Life Cycle Product Development including 
virtual product development and manufacturing simulation 
- Process control and instrumentation for characterization and verification 
of material properties (including thermal, optical, electrical, mechanical, and 
moisture absorption) 
- Rapid-prototyping technologies leading to improved structural integrity 
materials for use in end-item component processing. 
- Innovations in aerogel insulation which effectively address: the strength 
limitations of most aerogels; the environmental and safety issues associated 
with aerogel manufacture; efficient processes for application of aerogel to 
space hardware. 
- Biomimetic processes with high potential for increased structural 
properties and decreased weight. 
- Fabrication and joining of advanced metallic and metal matrix composite 
(MMC) materials for increased strength and reduced weight.  Areas of interest 
include, but are not limited to: 
- Particulate, fiber or hybrid composites, high or low temperature 
application, gaseous/liquid oxygen or hydrogen compatibility application
- Isotropic property for ultra high strength and lightweight metals, alloys 
and nanophase materials to achieve more than 120 ksi tensile strength at room 
temperature, and 60 ksi at elevated temperature above 500 F
- Low cost and net shape fabricating methods for metal matrix composites and 
advanced metallic materials 
- Innovative technologies for bonding and joining of similar and dissimilar 
materials to improve joint efficiency, allow joining of a wider range of 
materials, improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of the joint, and extend 
the understanding of factors influencing these characteristics. 

03.07 Space Propulsion Systems Test Operations 
Lead Center: SSC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Proposals are solicited for innovative concepts in the area of propulsion test 
operations.  Proposals should support the reduction of overall propulsion test 
operations costs (recurring costs) and/or increase reliability and performance 
of propulsion ground test facilities and operations methodologies.  Specific 
areas of interest in this subtopic include the following: 

Facility and Test Article Health Monitoring Technologies 
- New innovative non-intrusive sensors for measuring flow rate, temperature, 
pressure, rocket engine plume constituents, effluent gas detection, hydrogen 
leak detection, and hydrogen fires. 
- On-line particulate and quality sampling for facility propellant (liquid 
oxygen and hydrogen) and support gas systems (helium, hydrogen, oxygen, 
nitrogen, and missile-grade air). 

Improvement in Ground-Test Operation, Safety, Cost-Effectiveness, and 
Reliability 
- Smart system components (control valves, regulators, and relief valves) 
which provide real-time closed-loop control, component configuration, automated 
operation, and component health. 
- Cryogenic propellant transfer system operation technologies which include 
automated propellant transfer, automated propellant-line (liquid hydrogen) purge 
systems, and automated and/or manual propellant-line quick-
disconnect systems. 
- Long-life, liquid-oxygen-compatible seal technology. 
- Cryogenic storage tank lifetime monitor systems for temperature cycles, 
stress, acoustics, pressure and shock. 

Application of System Science to Ground-Test Operations in a Resource 
Constrained Environment 
- Digital simulation techniques to support decision making processes to address 
reliability, availability, and return on investment and training of environment 
for test conductors. 
- Techniques to improve high-speed data acquisition and high-speed video systems 
for test area data and video transmissions. 
- Techniques to reduce required sample size to maintain acceptable levels of 
confidence in cost data. 
- Risk management techniques. 

04 Small Aircraft Transportation System 

Numerous factors combine to create opportunities a small aircraft transportation 
system for business and personal travel in the 21st century.  These include 
rapid growth in air travel (increasing pressure on National Airspace System 
(NAS) capacity and safety and for affordable NAS operations for the Government 
and users), declining numbers of communities served by scheduled air carriers, 
increasingly stringent international environmental standards, an aging fleet of 
small aircraft, and aggressive foreign competition.  NASA seeks innovative 
technologies supporting advances in flight systems, airspace and ground systems 
infrastructure, integrated design and manufacturing and aircraft configuration 
design concepts as well as general aviation propulsion technologies. 

04.01 Small Aircraft Transportation System Technologies 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

NASA seeks innovative technologies to support advances for small aircraft 
transportation systems that substantially increase the demand for retrofit of 
existing aircraft, new aircraft and airport and airspace utilization.  Of 
specific interest are advanced, affordable, certifiable technologies for human-
factors engineered display of flight information for total situational awareness 
and simplified integration of flight controls with displays and propulsion 
systems.  In addition, innovations are desired in cost-effective, user-friendly 
improvements in the graphical display of weather, traffic, and NAS facilities' 
information services in the cockpit.  NASA also seeks innovations in 
manufacturing methods and materials that can radically reduce the unit cost of 
small aircraft.  Specifically, proposals are sought for the following areas: 

Aircraft Configuration 
- Advanced concepts that reduce the landing speed for FAR Part 23 aircraft under 
6,000 pounds by half. Advanced concepts for roadable aircraft are also desired.  
This category must include a sound business plan for production with a technical 
plan providing for compatibility with the emerging National Airspace System 
architecture and a certification plan to meet at least one of the following 
applicable FARs: Part 103 (Ultra-lite vehicle), Part 21.24 (Primary Category 
Aircraft), Part 23 (Certified Aircraft) or Part 27 (Rotorcraft), or Part 21.191 
Advisory Circular AC No: 20-27 series (Experimental Homebuilt Aircraft). 

Flight System Technologies, Information Systems and Pilot Vehicle Interface 
- Cost-effective advances in emerging navigation and graphical weather displays, 
graphical depiction methods, intuitive cockpit display systems with emphasis on 
pilot-display interface, flight controls, voice interface, portable and wearable 
display technologies, communications and human factors engineering technologies 
to aid pilot decision-making and to reduce cockpit workload. 

Certifiable Off-the-Shelf System Hardware and Software 
- Affordable cockpit systems including sensors, attitude-heading reference 
systems, terrain, obstacle, and hazardous weather avoidance systems, and 
applications for standardized data bus system architectures such as firmware, 
software, design and maintenance tools, and flight information and management 
products for airplane systems status and flight planning. 

Airspace Infrastructure 
- Advances and innovations in digital high-speed, high-bandwidth 
communications, and intelligent system design for automated, collaborative 
decision making, and systems for collision avoidance. 

Integrated Design and Manufacturing 
- Innovative manufacturing methods and materials providing significant advances 
in the cost, safety, weight, and cabin comfort for general aviation aircraft 
through materials technology, structural designs and assembly, and crash-
worthiness.  All proposals should include supportability plans (support 
infrastructure, maintenance requirements, operations, and training), 
certification plans (cite specific FARs), compatibility with current and future 
airspace architecture, and a clear path to commercialization. 

04.02 Small Aircraft Transportation System Propulsion Technologies 
Lead Center: GRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

NASA seeks proposals that offer small aircraft dramatic improvements in 
acquisition and life-cycle costs, performance, safety and reliability, 
environmental compatibility (noise, emissions and fuel), ease of operation and 
passenger comfort through innovative propulsion concepts and/or integration of 
innovative propulsion technologies. In all cases, the offeror must demonstrate 
acquisition and life-cycle costs that are at least comparable to current 
propulsion system costs.  Anticipated benefits must be defined using appropriate 
theoretical and experimental data.  An understanding of the basis of the 
technology innovation and its application to aircraft engines must be 
demonstrated.  Offerors must address commercialization potential.  Paths to FAA 
certification must be described.  Proposals are sought in the following areas: 

Propulsion Technologies.  NASA seeks propulsion technologies for small aircraft 
that will result in substantial improvements over those targeted in the NASA 
General Aviation Propulsion program.  Any improvements in areas such as 
performance, safety, and environmental compatibility must be accomplished with 
affordability as a prime consideration.  Substantially reduced costs, at least 
75 percent less than current systems, are highly preferred.  Advanced 
technologies which could lead to advantageous alternate propulsion systems and 
fuels (e.g., electric propulsion, hydrogen fuel, etc.) are also sought.  Offeror 
must provide strong rationale for the viability and affordability of the 
propulsion concept which would use the proposed technology, and show substantial 
benefits over conventional propulsion systems.  It is recognized that 
unconventional propulsion systems will likely be long term developments, 
however, it is highly preferred that the specified technology development 
addressed by the offeror have an application which could be commercialized in 
the nearer term. 

Propulsion System Control and Health Monitoring Technology.  NASA seeks 
proposals for low cost electronic engine control and health monitoring system 
technologies which substantially reduce pilot workload, fuel consumption, and 
engine emissions, and increase safety, reliability, and time between overhaul 
(TBO).  Engine diagnostics should focus on pilot notification of engine status 
and operability, post-flight diagnostic methods, trend analysis, maintenance 
aides, and automatic fault accommodation.  Much of this technology already 
exists, but it is too costly and/or too costly to certify for light aircraft.  
In some cases, cost reductions by orders of magnitude must be achieved.  
Development of methods for using commercially available high volume hardware and 
achieving low cost software production and validation is encouraged. 

05 Aero-Space Vehicle Design Tools 

The Aero-Space Technology Enterprise is engaged in developing the tools, 
techniques, and technologies to revolutionize the design and development 
processes of the aerospace industry with the goal to reduce the aerospace 
vehicle development cycle time by one-half.  Aerospace vehicle systems design of 
the future will more fully integrate the various aerospace disciplines and 
require a greater understanding of not only the critical physics of the various 
disciplines, but also how the physics of the various disciplines play together.  
Thus, an important element in the next generation design of aerospace vehicle 
systems will be the control of these physics to enhance safety, affordability, 
productivity, and environmental compatibility.  The concept of design spans the 
evaluation of requirements; consideration of manufacturing, operations support, 
and other non-traditional domains; effective utilization of ground and flight 
test results, up to the point of actual manufacture.  Information technology, 
advanced physics-based analytical tools, methods to control the process of 
design, innovative test instrumentation, and flow control and simulation are key 
areas in this effort. 

05.01 Modeling and Control of Complex Flows Over Aerospace Vehicles and 
Propulsion Systems 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

This subtopic solicits innovative ideas, concepts, and methodologies for the 
measurement, prediction, modeling and control of unsteady aerodynamic and 
aerothermodynamic phenomena that may be encountered by subsonic, transonic, and 
supersonic aircraft, and aerospace vehicles.  Biologically inspired approaches 
and/or ideas for flow control are also solicited in this subtopic.  Also of 
interest are advanced measurement systems and ground testing techniques to 
provide dynamic and global measuring capabilities, higher bandwidth, and 
improved resolution.  Additionally, the subtopic is interested in innovative 
computational and experimental techniques that account for the complex 
aerothermodynamic, mixing, and combustion phenomena impacting the design and 
development of future space transportation vehicles, aero-assist orbital 
transfer vehicles, planetary entry probes, and hypersonic airbreathing ropulsion 
systems.  Unsteady phenomena of interest include, but are not limited to, 
boundary layer transition and turbulence; vortical and separated flows; 
equilibrium and finite-rate chemistry; thermodynamic and transport properties of 
multicomponent mixtures, gaseous radiation, gas-surface interactions, mixing and 
combustion, shock-wave/boundary-layer interactions; and laminar, transitional, 
and turbulent reacting flows.  Specific areas of interest include: 

- Flow-physics modeling and control of transition and/or transitional flows, 
turbulence, and turbulence-related phenomena such as heat transfer, skin-
friction, acoustics, mixing and combustion. 
- Control and/or mitigation of separation, and vortical flows, including 
drag-due-to-lift, and shock wave drag. 
- Non-conventional numerical methods for solving fluid-flow equations that 
increase computational efficiency, accuracy, speed, and utility, including 
construction of new algorithms, improved computer languages, improved 
boundary condition procedures, efficient grid-algorithm interfacing, and 
applications of automation techniques. 
- Advanced test techniques and flow diagnostics (including non-intrusive 
flow diagnostics and surface diagnostics) for developing definitive databases 
across speed range from subsonic to hypersonic facilities including shock-
expansion pulse facilities. 
- MEMS and nano technology sensors and interface electronics for flow 
measurements including flow velocity, pressure, temperature, shear stress, 
vibration, force, attitude, and/or acceleration. 
- A small onboard multichannel intelligent data system and/or a high-speed 
wireless (optical or radio frequency) data transfer system with 50 mega-bits-
per-second or higher data rate for wind tunnel model applications. 
- Optical flow diagnostic technologies capable of resolving velocity, density, 
temperature, etc., in a global sense to provide planar or volumetric data, or at 
multiple points within the flow to provide temporally dependent cross 
correlations at sample rates of 100 kHz. 

05.02 Modeling and Simulation of Aerospace Vehicles in a Flight Test Environment 
Lead Center: DFRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Safer and more efficient design of advanced aerospace vehicles requires 
advancement in current predictive design tools.  The goal of this subtopic is to 
develop more efficient software tools for predicting and understanding the 
response of an airframe under the simultaneous influence of aerodynamics and the 
control system, in addition to pilot commands.  The benefit of this effort will 
ultimately be increased flight safety (particularly during flight tests), more 
efficient aerospace vehicles, and an increased understanding of the complex 
interactions between the vehicle subsystems.  This subtopic solicits proposals 
for novel, multi-disciplinary, linear or nonlinear, dynamic systems simulation 
techniques.  Proposals should address one or more of the objectives listed 
below: 

- Prediction of steady and unsteady pressure and thermal load distributions 
on the aerospace surfaces, or similar distributions due to propulsive forces, by 
employing accurate finite element CFD techniques. 
- Effective finite element numerical algorithms for multidisciplinary systems 
response analysis with adaptive three-dimensional grid/mesh generation at 
selected time steps. 
- Effective use of high-performance computing machines, including parallel 
processors, for integrated systems analysis or pilot-in-the-loop simulators. 
- Innovative applications of high-performance computer graphics or virtual 
reality systems for visualizing the computer model or results. 
- Correlation of predictive analyses with test data or model update schemes 
based on measured information. 

06 Advanced Concepts and Experimental Flight Research 

The NASA Aero-Space Technology Enterprise is engaged in developing the tools, 
techniques, and technologies to revolutionize the Aerospace design and 
development process.  This topic seeks advanced vehicle concepts that accelerate 
the exploration of high-risk, breakthrough technologies in order to enable 
revolutionary departures from traditional approaches to air vehicle design 
(Revolutionary Aerospace Vehicle Systems Concepts), propulsion (Revolutionary 
Technologies and Components for Turbine Based Combined Cycles), and flight test 
(Flight Sensors, Sensor Arrays, and Airborne Instruments for Flight Research). 

06.01 Revolutionary Aerospace Vehicle Systems Concepts 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

The emphasis in this subtopic is on advanced aerospace vehicle concepts for both 
military and civil applications that accelerate the exploration of high risk, 
breakthrough technologies in order to enable revolutionary departures from 
traditional approaches to air vehicle design.  Concepts must contribute to 
improving safety, performance, capacity, reduced emissions and/or noise, and 
development, production, or operations cost of future air vehicles.  The scope 
includes advanced aerospace vehicle concepts and airframe systems such as wing, 
fuselage, propulsion/airframe integration, and technologies applicable to these.  
Specific technical areas of interest include the following: 

Advanced aerospace vehicle concepts and configurations of subsonic to supersonic 
air-breathing vehicles and unique propulsion/airframe integration concepts that 
offer revolutionary increases in performance over conventional aircraft designs.  
Innovative system-oriented research to support, develop, and/or enable advanced 
airframe technologies and concepts that could impact the design and optimization 
of any future class of aircraft. 

Efficient, design-oriented application software embodying the mathematical and 
algorithmic aspects of both multidisciplinary design optimization (MDO) and 
systems analysis methods for aerospace vehicles. 

Adaptation of newly emerging technologies, such as biomimetics and carbon 
nanotubes to aerospace vehicle concepts. 

06.02 Revolutionary Technologies and Components for Turbine Based Combined 
Cycles 
Lead Center: GRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

A turbine based combined cycle (TBCC) propulsion system consists of low-speed 
turbine engine propulsion and high-speed propulsion, probably RAM/SCRAM, to 
achieve missions of high-speed aircraft, access to space, global cruise, and 
high-speed transports.  NASA seeks highly innovative approaches in all 
technologies and components pertinent to TBCC which will enable high thrust-to-
weight turbine engine operation over the flight spectrum up to Mach 5.  The 
emphasis in this subtopic is on revolutionary changes to the existing state-of-
the-art.  Specific technical areas include the following: 

- Advanced cooling concepts that provide reduced coolant penalties.  This can 
include innovative cooling systems, materials concepts, fuel cooling of 
combustor, and endothermic fuels and/or fuel additives to increase the heat-sink 
capacity or cooling capacity of fuels. 
- Innovative concepts relating to fuel distribution, piloting, flame holding and 
active and passive combustion controls in order to extend the operability of the 
combustion components to a wider range of operating conditions which would be 
experienced in a TBCC engine. 
- New techniques to improve the aerodynamic performance and operability of the 
inlet, including highly offset subsonic diffusers and designs for boundary layer 
control, minimizing engine unstart susceptibility, and techniques to identify 
and control the onset of mode transition between different propulsion concepts 
within the same internal flowpath or dual flowpaths. 
- New controllable and reliable nozzle concepts with optimum expansion 
efficiency and thrust vectoring capability, including a computational nozzle 
design methodology to study various geometries and chemistry effects. 
- Enabling technologies of components and subsystems that allow turbomachinery 
to operate at high-speed flight conditions.  Specific examples include 1) a 
lightweight, high pressure ratio compressor which must be protected or removed 
from the extremely high temperature primary air stream; 2) applications of 
advanced ceramic/composite materials or micro-electrical-mechanical systems to 
enhance the performance and reduce the cost and weight; and 3) innovative life 
prediction techniques for ceramic/composite turbomachinery components. 
- New concepts to combine turbine propulsion with other propulsion concepts to 
achieve acceptable thrust and fuel consumption over the entire flight spectrum 
of a TBCC.  Proposals for these concepts should address analytic assessments of 
feasibility, cost/benefit tradeoff studies, and engine life cycle analyses. 

06.03 Flight Sensors, Sensor Arrays, and Airborne Instruments for Flight 
Research 
Lead Center: DFRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Real-time measurement techniques are needed to acquire aerodynamic, structural 
and propulsion system performance characteristics in flight and to safely expand 
the flight envelope of aerospace vehicles.  The scope of this subtopic is the 
development of sensors, sensor systems, sensor arrays or instrumentation systems 
for improving the state-of-the art in aircraft ground or flight testing.  This 
includes the development of sensors to enhance aircraft safety by determining 
atmospheric conditions.  The goals are to improve the effectiveness of flight 
testing by: simplifying and minimizing sensor installation; measuring new 
parameters; improving the quality of measurements; minimizing the disturbance to 
the measured parameter from the sensor presence; deriving new information from 
conventional techniques; or combining sensor suites with embedded processing to 
add value to output information.  This subtopic solicits proposals for improving 
airborne sensors and sensor-instrumentation systems in subsonic, supersonic and 
hypersonic flight regimes.  These sensors and systems are required to have fast 
response, low volume, minimal intrusion and high accuracy and reliability, and 
include wireless technology.  Innovative concepts are solicited in the following 
areas: 

Vehicle Environmental Monitoring 
- Nonintrusive air data parameters (airspeed, air temperature, ambient and 
stagnation pressures, Mach number, air density, flow angle, and humidity at air 
temperatures as low as -20 deg. F). 
- Off-surface flow field measurement and/or visualization (laminar, vortical, 
and separated flow, turbulence) 0 to 50 meters from the aircraft. 
- Boundary layer flow field, surface pressure distribution, acoustics or 
skin friction measurements or visualization. 
- Any of the above measurements in hypersonic flow. 

Vehicle Condition Monitoring 
- Optical arrays for robust flight control surface position and velocity 
measurement. 
- Sensor arrays for structural load monitoring. 
- Robust arrays for engine monitoring and control applications.  Advanced 
instrumentation for aeropropulsion flight tests.  Thin film and fiber optic 
sensors, especially those compatible with advanced propulsion system 
materials such as ceramics and composites, and capable of withstanding the high 
temperatures and pressures associated with turbomachinery. 
- Onboard processing for data condensation, failed sensor identification or 
other valuable onboard processing capability. 

Vehicle Far Field Environmental Monitoring 
- Nonintrusive measurements at range of 2-5 kilometers of environmental data 
(natural and induced flowfields, turbulence, weather, traffic). 
- Onboard processing of sensed and telemetered data for integrated storage and 
strategic presentation to the flight crew. 

07 Aviation System Through-Put 

A major NASA goal in global civil aviation is to triple the aviation system 
throughput in all weather conditions while maintaining safety.  An additional 
goal is to significantly reduce the cost of air travel.  These increases in the 
capacity and productivity of the National Airspace System (NAS) can be achieved 
through development of revolutionary ground-based and airborne operations 
systems, and vehicle concepts. 

07.01 Advanced Concepts in Air and Space Traffic Management 
Lead Center: ARC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Air-Traffic Management (ATM) combines the traditional separation assurance 
performed by Air-Traffic Control (ATC) and the flight-path management functions 
concerned with improving system capacity and capability.  The challenge for the 
next generation ATM system is to accommodate growth in air traffic while 
reducing the aircraft accident rate by a factor of five within 10 years, and by 
a factor of ten within 20 years.  This can only be achieved by the introduction 
of technical innovations in communication, navigation, and surveillance (CNS) 
and by the development of decision support tools for controllers, pilots and 
airline operations.  It also requires a new look at the way airspace is managed 
and automation of some crew functions, thereby intensifying the need for a 
careful integration of machine and human performance.  Innovative and 
economically attractive approaches are sought to advance technologies in the 
following areas: 

- Decision support tools (DST) to assist pilots, controllers and dispatchers in 
all parts of the airspace (en route, terminal and surface). 
- Integration of DST across different airspace.  Simulation and modeling tools 
to assess benefits of new concepts. Technologies and concepts leading to greater 
airborne operational independence. 
- Methods of integrating air and ground roles and responsibilities. 
- Distributed decision making and its impact on the stability of the airspace. 
- System recovery and safety in the event of failure of sensors and decision 
support tools. 
- Weather modeling and improved trajectory estimation. - New concepts in air 
space management and impact of Commercial Space Transportation on ATM. 
- Role of data exchange and data link in co-operative decision making.
- Modeling of National Airspace System.
- Numan factors and workload concepts relating to safe control/integration of 
aircraft and other ground vehicles systems. 
- Concepts and innovative methods to integrate simultaneous movement of the 
ground vehicles and the aircraft fleet. 

07.02 Rotorcraft/STOVL Aerodynamics and Dynamics 
Lead Center: ARC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Many aspects of rotorcraft/STOVL (Short Take-Off and Vertical Landing) 
aerodynamics and dynamics are not thoroughly understood or adequately redictable 
enough to enable efficient and accurate design processes for economically viable 
civil aviation aircraft with vertical lift/STOVL capability. NASA requires 
innovative methods, approaches, and technologies that describe phenomena 
involved in rotorcraft/STOVL aerodynamics, dynamics, acoustics and autonomous 
control; provide greater knowledge of the detailed characteristics of these 
phenomena; and permit well-verified designs.  Innovative developments with 
applications to tilt rotors, single main rotor and tandem helicopters, coaxial 
helicopters, hover-capable unmanned aerial vehicles and rotors with on-blade 
control are needed to refine next generation rotorcraft and STOVL aircraft that 
will meet civilian global aviation requirements for safer, quieter, more 
efficient, lower direct operating cost aircraft.  These requirements directly 
impact the enabling technology goals identified by NASA to support the agency's 
mission in rotorcraft. 

Examples of problems currently of importance include: efficient rotor design 
tools which reduce design cycle time; improved vehicle performance with 
reduction in ownership and operation costs; advanced active control 
strategies/methodologies for aeromechanics control and enhanced vehicle 
capability; innovative solutions for reducing airframe vibration, rotor 
vibratory loads, and radiated noise; and improving rotorcraft safety.  New 
analysis methodologies addressing the unique aspects of civilian rotorcraft 
aircraft through CFD/CSM/CAA for individual and integrated vehicle systems are 
also sought. 




8.2 HUMAN EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF SPACE

The mission of the Human Exploration and Development of Space (HEDS) Enterprise 
is to open the space frontier by exploring, using and enabling the development 
of space and to expand the human experience into the far reaches of space.  In 
exploring space, HEDS brings people and machines together to overcome the 
challenges of distance, time and environment.  Robotic science missions survey 
and characterize other bodies as precursors to eventual human missions.  In 
using space, HEDS emphasizes learning how to live and work there and utilize the 
resources and unique environment.  In enabling the development of space, HEDS 
serves as a catalyst for commercial space development.  Throughout, this 
Enterprise will employ breakthrough technologies and ingenious designs to 
revolutionize human space flight. 

http://www.hq.nasa.gov/osf/heds/



08 EXPLORE THE SPACE FRONTIER	
08.01 In Situ Resources Utilization of Planetary Materials for Human Space 
Missions	
08.02 Robotics	
09 EXPAND SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE	
09.01 Exploiting Gravitational Effects for Combustion, Fluids, Synthesis, and 
Vibration Technology	
09.02 Understanding and Utilizing Gravitational Effects on Molecular Biology and 
for Medical Applications	
09.03 Understanding and Utilizing Gravitational Effects on Plants and Animals	
09.04 Understanding and Utilizing Gravitational Effects on Biotechnology and 
Materials Science	
10 ENABLE HUMANS TO LIVE AND WORK PERMANENTLY IN SPACE	
10.01 Spacecraft Life Support Infrastructure	
10.02 Space Crew Accommodations and Performance Enhancements	
10.03 On-Board Human Health Maintenance, and Countermeasures	
10.04 Spacecraft Environmental Monitoring for Crew Health	
10.05 Extravehicular Activity Productivity	
10.06 Thermal Control Systems for Human Space Missions	
10.07 Spaceport and In-Space Cryogenic Fluids, Handling, and Storage 
Technologies	
10.08 Terrestrial and Planetary Spaceport Instrumentation and Range Technologies
10.09 Process/Industrial Engineering Technologies	
10.10 Flight/Ground System Autonomous Operations	
11 ENABLE THE COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT OF SPACE	
11.01 Commercial Microgravity Research	
12 SHARE THE EXPERIENCE AND BENEFITS OF DISCOVERY	
12.01 Telescience and Outreach for Space Exploration	





08 Explore the Space Frontier 

Earth orbit, the Moon, and near-Earth space, Mars and the asteroids, eventually 
the moons of the giant planets of the outer Solar System, and someday more 
distant worlds-these are collectively the endless, ever-expanding frontier of 
the night sky under which the human species evolved and toward which the human 
spirit is inevitably drawn.  There are certain ideas which many believe to be 
inherent in the human psyche and integral to American culture: ambition for 
progress, curiosity about the unknown, the need to pose profound questions 
and to answer them, the concern of new frontiers that, once achieved, promise a 
better quality of life for all peoples.  Space is such a frontier.  Earth orbit, 
the Moon, and near-Earth space, Mars and the asteroids, eventually the moons of 
the giant planets of the outer Solar System, and someday more distant worlds-
these are collectively the endless, ever-expanding frontier of the night sky 
under which the human species evolved and toward which the human spirit is 
inevitably drawn.  It is therefore a fundamental goal of NASA to expand the 
frontier of space progressively through human exploration missions, utilization 
of space for scientific research, and commercial development. 

08.01 In Situ Resources Utilization of Planetary Materials for Human Space 
Missions 
Lead Center: JSC  
Participating Center(s): KSC 

Significant benefits for future human missions to the Moon, Mars, and other 
planetary bodies may be attained by making maximum use of local, indigenous 
materials as a source for products such as propellants, life support 
consumables, radiation protection, and construction materials.  By pursuing the 
philosophy of "make what you need at the planet instead of bringing it all the 
way from Earth", In Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU) can result in reduction of 
mass requirements for the exploration mission, reduction in mission risk and 
cost, and expanded human presence on the planetary surface.  It can also enable 
industrial participation in planetary exploration and commercial development of 
space.  Even though NASA currently does not have approved plans for human 
exploration missions beyond Low Earth Orbit, studies and mission design efforts, 
and technology and system development activities are being pursued to develop 
technologies and mission concepts that can significantly reduce the mass, cost, 
and risk, or enable robotic and human exploration initiatives early in this 
century.  Key goals are to minimize the mass which must be brought from the 
Earth (including the equipment required to move or process the resource), 
minimize power consumption, enable or enhance new mission concepts, be truly 
innovative, and use methods not already in the literature. 

Proposals may be submitted for ISRU concepts at various destinations, including 
the Moon, Mars, asteroids, etc.  However, the focus of this year's subtopic is 
upon lunar and potential commercial space ISRU applications, and proposals that 
are responsive to this focus will receive higher priority.  Technologies that 
are applicable to multiple locations or applications will also have 
appropriately higher weighting.  Areas for investigation of specific methods and 
processes for in situ resource utilization include the following: 

- Methods and systems for digging, sorting, mineral separation, and transporting 
regolith or other materials to a processing reactor.  Such systems should be 
lightweight, efficient, and capable of operating with minimal human supervision 
and maintenance.
- Methods for extracting, collecting, and processing (if required) mission 
enabling or enhancing consumables (propellants, oxygen, etc.), or commercially 
viable resources and/or products from lunar regolith that are power efficient 
and require a minimum of Earth-supplied reagents.  Alternatives and 
improvements to previously-studied methods, such as reactors that expose lunar 
regolith to hydrogen or methane gas at elevated temperature, and extraction and 
collection of possible water/ice are of interest.  However, emphasis should be 
placed on innovative designs that minimize power requirements, and proposals for 
water/ice extraction should recognize the uncertainty and potential variability 
of both the location and abundance of such water. 
- Methods for processing surface materials into useful equipment (e.g., solar 
panels, radio antennas, replacement parts, etc.) which require no further 
manufacturing or assembly.
- Methods and systems for extracting, processing, and manufacturing in situ 
materials that can be used for construction of habitable structures or other 
needed products and infrastructure on the Moon or Mars that enable long-term 
settlement. 
- Methods for extraction, collection and processing (if required) of mission 
enhancing consumables or commercially viable resources that may be present on 
the surface or subsurface of asteroids, comets, or other planetary moons of 
commercial or scientific interest.  Proposals in this area should recognize the 
uncertainty and potential variability of both the location and abundance of such 
resources. 
-Innovative processes and alternative approaches for extracting and producing 
propellants and/or other mission enhancing consumables and products from 
atmospheric, surface, and subsurface resources on Mars which have low power 
requirements and minimize the amount of equipment that must be brought from 
Earth.  Systems should be capable of operating autonomously, independent from 
continual Earth-based control, and should recognize the uncertainty and 
potential variability of both the location and abundance of such resources. 

08.02 Robotics 
Lead Center: JSC  
Participating Center(s): KSC 

Proposals are solicited for innovative concepts that improve robotic 
capabilities as well as the humans ability to interact with and control robotic 
systems while minimizing the workload to EVA and IVA astronauts, as well as 
ground operators. 

Robotic Manipulators, End-Effectors, and Joints 
Proposals are sought which include improvements to robotic joints, actuators, 
end-effectors, tools, and mechanisms.  Proposals should address issues 
associated with space compatibility.  Specific areas of interest include the 
following: 

Technologies or systems that provide a reduction to the weight and or volume of 
robotic systems such as: 

-  Reduced scale high power-to-weight ratio actuators including but not 
limited to magnestostrictive motors and synthetic muscles. 
-  Miniaturized actuator control and drive electronics. 
-  Miniaturized sensing systems for manipulator position, rate, acceleration, 
force and torque. 

Robotic systems that accommodate existing EVA tools including but not limited to 
anthropomorphic systems and multi-fingered dexterous end-effectors. 

Planetary robotic mobility systems and devices; Robots will be needed to work 
with and transport humans and equipment on a planetary surface.  Examples 
include novel rover drive systems, suspension systems, and manipulator systems.

Compact low power devices for site setup, operation, and planetary surface 
exploration.  Novel mechanisms are needed to enable human exploration and 
habitation of planetary bodies.  Examples include site clearing and setup 
devices, equipment deployment devices, sample collection and manipulation 
devices, and the actuation components for these devices.  

Human/Robotic Interface 
Proposals that improve operator efficiency via advanced displays, controls and 
telepresence interfaces, and improve the ability of humans and computers to 
seamlessly control robotic systems are sought.  Specific technology requirements 
include the following: 

Tactile feedback devices that provide operator awareness of contact between work 
space objects and the robot structure.  Key aspects of this technology are 
ergonomics and safety. 

Force feedback devices that provide operator awareness of manipulator and 
payload inertia, gripping force, and forces and moments due to contact with 
external objects.  Key aspects of this technology are ergonomics and safety. 

Stereo graphic display systems that provide high-fidelity depth perception, 
field of view, and high resolution. Tracking position and orientation of user 
appendages (i.e., head, arms, fingers, eyes) for the purpose of providing motion 
commands to the robot.  Key aspects of this technology are to free the operator 
of any exoskeletons or devices attached to the body which impede or restrict the 
operator's movements. 

Innovative miniaturized display hardware for use with Helmet Mounted Display 
(HMD) systems that project data in a Head Up Display (HUD) format.  Emphasis is 
placed on compact, low mass hardware that can be used with HMD displays and 
efficiently display data (graphical and alphanumeric) without detracting from 
the HMD displayed video.  

Intelligent Autonomous Systems
Artificial Intelligence Based Systems and Architectures, with Provision for Crew 
Oversight.

Proposals are solicited for innovative concepts which will increase the 
functionality and robustness of extravehicular robotic (EVR) systems for science 
and operations.  One example of such a robot is an EVA Robotic Assistant for 
planetary surface exploration.  This robot should be able to follow a geologist, 
carry his tools and samples, provide video documentation of his activities plus 
real-time video for remote viewing and be commandable via a combination of 
gesture/voice by the geologist.  Innovative concepts in machine vision, as well 
as in other non-vision forms of sensing and perception, which can provide the 
necessary input for the robotic system to function under a wide variety of 
operating conditions are required.  Some specific technology needs to enable 
this EVA Robotic Assistant are: 

- Small, low power machine vision systems for tracking a moving, articulated 
object, such as a geologist exploring a planetary surface on foot.  The tracker 
should not encumber the geologist by requiring him to wear special targets or 
beacons. 
- Aided dead-reckoning and landmark navigation to keep a record, referenced to 
the terrain, of where the geologist is now and where he has been.  Systems which 
do not require emplacement of external beacons are needed. 
- Machine vision techniques for real-time image registration to create mosaics 
suitable for human viewing are needed.  Mosaic construction must take into 
account camera motion and changes in lighting over extended periods, either 
several hours of EVA activity or a subsequent return to a previously visited 
location.  This is intended to let the crew back in the habitat see what the 
geologist sees or to look around as if they were there. 

Another example of an EVR is a mobile, remotely controlled video camera platform 
capable of transmitting video to its operator.  For planetary surface xploration 
this could be a scout intended to locate sites for follow-up EVA.  For in-space 
operations, this could be an AERCam used to provide video views on demand of the 
exterior of the International Space Station or a future Space Solar Power 
Satellite to inspect for damage, plan or supervise repair work, etc.  Specific 
technology needs include: 

- Supervised and traded control systems which allow for seamless human/robot 
interaction.  The ability to accommodate both planned and unplanned human and 
autonomous operations within a task is essential.  
- Model based landmark navigation to allow a mobile camera platform to find 
its way around the outside of a large satellite without requiring the addition 
of expensive external beacons including the ability to update the model of the 
satellite exterior as it changes. 
- Machine vision techniques, including the construction of image mosaics, 
for detection of unspecified changes in objects being inspected under changing 
lighting and viewing conditions. 
- Virtual reality interfaces that make it practical to operate such a robotic 
camera platform in close proximity to a large satellite when the operator has 
the view from the camera platform but no views of the platform. 

09 Expand Scientific Knowledge 

As we have gained control over crucial variables, such as gravitational 
acceleration, a new window has opened on the world around us.  Throughout the 
history of scientific inquiry on Earth, gravity has been an inescapable and 
confounding influence.  Every living organism we know has evolved under 
gravity's constant pull; every physical process we have studied, we have studied 
in the presence of gravity.  Access to the environments of space and of the 
planets has led us to raise new and profound questions affecting our fundamental 
theoretical understanding of nature including living systems.  As we have gained 
control over crucial variables, such as gravitational acceleration, a new window 
has opened on the world around us.  It is the goal of HEDS to take advantage of 
the opportunities afforded by space to expand our fundamental knowledge of 
physical and biological processes - first using relatively simple model systems 
and then increasingly complex ones.  This approach will enable rigorous 
contributions to both scientific knowledge in general, as well as longer-term 
advances in technology of benefit to both NASA and commercial applications. 

09.01 Exploiting Gravitational Effects for Combustion, Fluids, Synthesis, and 
Vibration Technology 
Lead Center: GRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

NASA seeks innovative proposals for products to improve the operation and safety 
of orbiting spacecraft based on chemical and physical processes that exploit the 
microgravity and partial gravity environment.  Also sought are products for 
application to NASA missions involving Mars and the Moon and for ground-based 
application and commercialization based on principles, understandings, or 
testing in simplified, non-convective microgravity and partial gravity fields. 

For some demonstrations to support product development, the NASA Glenn Research 
Center can provide access and assistance to outside investigators in its unique 
facilities, including the Space Experiment Laboratory, the 2.2-second and 5.2-
second drop towers, and parabolic-trajectory (20 seconds of low gravity) 
aircraft (See Section 5.14). Specific areas of interest are: 

- Products based on combustion or related chemical reactions in gaseous, liquid, 
solid, or mixed phases for application to spacecraft operational needs or to 
derived ground systems, aided by principles, models, or demonstrations validated 
in the simplified environment of microgravity and partial gravity. 
- Products based on physical contact or transport in fluid, dispersed, or mixed 
phases for application to spacecraft operational needs or to derived ground 
systems, aided by principles, models, or demonstrations validated in the 
simplified environment of microgravity and partial gravity. 
- Small-scale intermetallic, ceramic, or similar products produced through 
combustion synthesis in solid, filter-flow, thermite, or other reactions, with 
product uniformity, composition, or yield controlled or improved by exposure to 
the non-convective microgravity and partial gravity environment. 
- Products to measure, isolate, or control acceleration, vibration, or jitter 
for application to spacecraft operational needs or to space experiment payloads 
or to derived ground systems. 
- Sensors, instrumentation, and diagnostics systems for application to non-
disturbing measurement of chemical, thermal, or flow parameters in microgravity 
and partial gravity or to derived ground systems, based on principles, models, 
or demonstrations validated in microgravity or partial gravity. 
- Products to promote or improve fire safety through prevention, detection, 
suppression, or post-fire restoration for application to spacecraft or to 
derived ground systems, aided by principles, models, or demonstrations 
validated in microgravity or partial gravity. 
- Fluid dynamic phenomena associated with materials processing, protein 
crystal growth and separation processes in microgravity and partial gravity as 
well as in the Earth-bound environment. 
- Technology that explains, enables or improves combustion and fluid processes 
in partial gravity environments to promote application of these processes to 
NASA's missions involving Mars and/or the Moon. 

09.02 Understanding and Utilizing Gravitational Effects on Molecular Biology and 
for Medical Applications 
Lead Center: JSC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Microgravity allows unique studies of the effects of gravitational effects on 
cell and tissue development and behavior.  These studies utilize novel and 
advanced technologies to culture and nurture cells and tissues.  Additionally, 
the ability to manipulate and/or exploit the form and function of living cells 
and tissues has significant potential to enhance the quality of life on Earth 
and in space through novel products and services, as well as through new science 
knowledge generated and communicated.  This capability may lead to new products 
and services for medicine and biology.  Current space research includes new 
methods for purification of living cells; development of space bioreactors for 
culture of fragile cells that have applications in biomedical and cancer 
research; tissue engineering systems which take advantage of microgravity to 
grow 3-D tissue constructs; testing the effectiveness of drugs and biomodulators 
on growth and physiology of normal and transformed cells, and methods for 
measuring specific cellular and systemic immune functions of persons under 
physiological stress.  Biotechnology research systems also are being developed 
for micro-g research on the International Space Station.  Specific areas of 
interest are: 

- New methods for culturing mammalian cells in bioreactors, including 
advanced bioreactor designs and support systems, miniature sensors for 
measurement of pH, oxygen, carbon-dioxide, glucose, metabolites, and 
microprocessor controllers. 
- Methods for separation and purification of living cells, proteins and 
biomaterials, especially those using electrokinetic or magnetic fields that 
obviate thermal convection and sedimentation, enhance phase partitioning, or use 
laser light and other force fields to manipulate target cells or biomaterials. 
- Techniques or apparatus for macro-molecular assembly of biological membranes, 
bio-polymers, and molecular bio-processing systems; bio-compatible materials, 
devices, and sensors for implantable medical applications including molecular 
diagnostics, in vivo physiological monitoring and microprocessor control of 
prosthetic devices. 
- Methods and apparatus which allow microscopic imaging and biophysical 
measurements of cell functions, effects of electric or magnetic fields, 
photoactivation, and testing of drugs or biocompatible polymers on live 
tissues. 
- Quantitative applications of molecular biology, fluorescence image and 
flow cytometry, and new methods for measurement of cell metabolism, 
cytogenetics, immune cell functions, DNA, RNA, oglionuceotides, intracellular 
proteins, secretory products, and cytokine or other cell surface receptors. 
- Micro-encapsulation of drugs, radiocontrast agents, crystals, and development 
of novel drug delivery systems wherein immiscible liquid interactions, 
electrostatic coating methods, and drug release kinetics from microcapsules or 
liposomes can be altered under microgravity to better understand and improve 
manufacturing processes on Earth.  This includes methods for improving the 
controlled release from transdermal drug devices, ionaphoresis, controlled 
hyperthermia and new drug delivery systems for inhalation and intranasal 
administration. 
- Miniature bioprocessing systems which allow for precise control of 
multiple environmental parameters such as low level fluid shear, thermal, pH, 
conductivity, external electromagnetic fields and narrow-band light for 
fluorescence or photoactivation of biological systems. 
- Low -temperature sample storage (-80oC) and biological sample preservation 
methods. 

09.03 Understanding and Utilizing Gravitational Effects on Plants and Animals 
Lead Center: ARC  
Participating Center(s): KSC 

This subtopic area focuses on technologies that support the NASA Gravitational 
Biology and Ecology Program in understanding the effects of gravity on plants 
and animals.  The program supports investigations into the ways in which 
fundamental biological processes function in space, compared to their function 
on the ground.  To conduct these investigations, the program supports both 
ground and space flight research. 

The improved understanding of the role of gravity on plants requires innovative 
support equipment for observing, measuring, and manipulating the responses of 
plants to environmental variables.  Areas of specific concern and emphasis 
include: 

- Measuring the atmospheric and radiation environment and optimizing the 
lighting and nutrient delivery systems for plants. 
- Innovative approaches to storage, transportation, maintenance, and in situ 
analyses of seeds and growing plants. 
- Sensors with low power requirements and low mass to monitor the atmosphere 
and water (nutrient) environment, as well as automated control and data logging 
systems for the experiment containers to measure performance indicators, such as 
respiration (whole plant, shoot, root), evapotranspiration, photosynthesis, and 
other variables in plants. 
- Data analysis and control. 
- Modular seeding and/or planting units to minimize labor. 
- Sensors for atmospheric, liquid and solid analyses, including atmospheric 
and liquid contaminants such as ethylene and other biogenic compounds as well as 
analyses of hydroponic and solid media for N, P, K, Cu, Mg and micronutrients. 
- Remote sensors to identify biological stress. 
- Expert control systems for environmental chambers. 

The improved understanding of the role of gravity on animals requires studies 
which range from organism development, including gametogenesis through 
fertilization, embryonic development and maturation, through ecological system 
stability.  Studies may include a variety of processes such as metabolism and 
metabolic control, through genetic expression and the control of development.  
Of particular interest are technologies that require minimal power and can non-
invasively measure physical, chemical, metabolical and development parameters.  
Such measurements will ultimately be made in environments at one or more of 
several gravity ranges, e.g., "microgravity" (.01 to .000001 g), "planetary" 
gravity (1 g (Earth); 0.38 g (Mars) or 0.12 g (Moon)) or hypergravity (up to 2 
g).  But, refined and stable measurements are as important as gravity 
independence.  Of interest are sustained instrument sensitivity, accuracy and 
stability, and reductions in the need for frequent measurement standardization.  
Parameters requiring measurement include pH, temperature, pressure, ionic 
strength, gas concentration (O2, CO2, CO, NO2, etc.), and solute concentration 
(e.g., Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, SO4 2-, Cl-, PO4 3-, etc.).  In the case of new 
techniques and instruments, a clear path toward miniaturization, reduction in 
power demands and increased space worthiness should be identified.  Interests 
applicable to plant, microorganism, and animal study applications include: 

- Expert data management systems. 
- Capabilities for specimen storage, manipulation and dissection. 
- Video-image analysis for biospecimen (cell, animal, plant) health and 
maintenance. 
- Sensors for primary environmental parameters and microbial organisms. 
- Biotelemetry monitors and biological monitors carried on remotely controlled 
spacecraft. 

09.04 Understanding and Utilizing Gravitational Effects on Biotechnology and 
Materials Science 
Lead Center: MSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

NASA has interest in experiments that characterize and utilize the influence of 
microgravity on biotechnology processes and materials science.  Areas of 
interest include protein crystal growth and structural analysis techniques, 
separation science and technology, advanced electronic and photonic materials 
research, metals and alloys technology, and glass and ceramic materials 
technology.  Other areas relate to microgravity processing approaches 
such as containerless processing and advanced thermal processing techniques.  
Innovations are sought in the following research areas and in their enabling 
technologies: 

Biotechnology 
- Advancement of high-yield protein or recombinant drug expression systems 
that function in cultures grown under simulated microgravity. 
- Automatic drug separation and purification from plants and cell cultures 
grown under confined conditions anticipated for prolonged residence in 
microgravity or off-Earth habitats. 
- Experiments and theoretical research in separation techniques and protein 
crystal growth for a greater understanding of such processes in the reduced-
gravity environment of space. 
- Mathematical modeling, new methods, materials, and techniques to exploit the 
potential of microgravity for the improvement and understanding of biochemical 
separation processes. 
- Instrumentation to determine the influence of crystallization parameters on 
the size and quality as well as growth rates of protein crystals that lead to 
commercial and medical applications. 

Materials Science 
- Technology and instrumentation leading to the formation, interaction and 
synthesis of particulate materials on Earth and in planetary environments and 
their application to the establishment of extraterrestrial outposts. 
- Materials and studies leading to applications in radiation shielding 
during human extraterrestrial exploration of space. 
- Polymers, composites, and other materials that incorporate sensory, 
effector, and self-repair technologies. 
- Electronic and photonic materials leading to solid-state detectors with 
improved properties, and controlled crystal growth for scientific and commercial 
applications. 
- Metallic alloys with improved grain structures by directional solidification 
and processing involving supercooling and undercooling states. 
- Simulation capabilities that will elucidate the interaction of transport 
properties during liquid state processing and can lead to desired 
microstructures and properties.  Experimental design methodologies combining 
advanced process models, optimization techniques, and control. 
- Advanced modeling techniques that can simulate the slow translation of a 
sample container relative to a host furnace for gradient processing, rapid 
translation for quench, and the quench.  Methods for simplifying this type of 
modeling process. 
- Methods for integrating the furnace with the sample containment system to 
allow fast, cheap microgravity experiments. 
- Experimental sample containment, instrumentation, or processing approaches 
that enhance scientific return or minimize impact to experiment samples.  Two 
examples are 1) containerless processing to control impurities and nucleation 
sites or allow processing of reactive melts, and 2) provide rapid cooling of the 
sample to enhance microstructural analysis. 
- Microgravity furnace instrumentation technologies to better understand 
sample health and experiment status while minimizing the instrumentation's 
effect on the sample. 
- Thermal insulation or heating approaches that enhance safety and use 
resources more efficiently. 
- Microgravity furnace technology for minimizing power, enhancing thermal 
axial gradients, and improving quench performance, while maintaining flat 
solidification interfaces, and minimizing disturbances to the sample. 

10 Enable Humans to Live and Work Permanently in Space 

Human presence will be an inextricable and critical factor in successfully 
opening the space frontier and expanding knowledge through research in space.  
Advances in technology notwithstanding, the human element continues to be the 
major factor in the success or failure of most terrestrial enterprises.  In many 
cases, the human element is a quintessential component in the public's 
continuing interest in, and support for the space program.  Human presence will 
be an inextricable and critical factor in successfully opening the space 
frontier and expanding knowledge through research in space.  As our activities 
in space grow, so too must human involvement.  In this way we open the door to 
an array of benefits, tangible and intangible, for the people of the United 
States and the world.  It is therefore a goal of NASA to enable and establish 
permanent and productive human presence in space, in order to advance America's 
aspirations in space and increase the opportunities afforded by space through 
new technologies and new ways of doing business. 

10.01 Spacecraft Life Support Infrastructure 
Lead Center: JSC  
Participating Center(s): ARC, JPL, KSC, MSFC 

Advanced life support systems are essential for the success of future human 
planetary exploration.  Striving for self-sufficiency and autonomous operation, 
future life support systems will integrate physicochemical and biological 
processes.  These hybrid systems, which include plant growth systems for the 
production of food and oxygen and utilization of recovered wastes, represent an 
additional closure of regenerative life support systems to further reduce mass 
and to promote self-sufficiency.  Requirements include safe operability in 
micro-and partial-gravity, high reliability, minimal use of expendables, ease of 
maintenance, and low system volume, mass, and power.  Innovative, efficient, 
practical concepts are desired in all areas of regenerative physicochemical and 
biological processes for the basic life-support functions of air revitalization, 
water reclamation, waste management, plant food production, and sensors and 
controls.  Also innovative, cost-effective concepts are desired to assess, 
predict, control and enhance the effect of microgravity and partial-gravity on 
the operation and performance of physicochemical and biological life support 
technologies.  In addition to these space exploration related applications, 
innovative regenerative life support approaches that could have terrestrial 
application are encouraged.  Phase-I research should lead to Phase-II's that 
strive for experimental development that could be integrated into a functional 
life support system.  Areas in which innovations are solicited include the 
following: 

Air Revitalization.  Oxygen, carbon dioxide, water vapor, and trace gas 
contaminant concentration, separation, and control techniques. 

- Separation of carbon dioxide from a mixture primarily of nitrogen, oxygen, 
and water vapor to maintain carbon dioxide concentrations below 0.3 percent by 
volume. 
- Separation of nitrogen and oxygen from carbon dioxide to reduce concentrations 
of nitrogen and oxygen to less than 0.2 percent by volume. 
- Removal of trace contaminant gases from cabin air with advanced regenerable 
sorbent materials, improved oxidation techniques or other methods. 

Water Reclamation.  Efficient, direct treatment of waste water (e.g., urine, 
wash water, and condensates) without requiring expendables to produce potable 
and hygiene water including stabilization of waste water and purge gases prior 
to storage, processing, or overboard-venting.  In particular, processes are 
required that reduce impurities in composite waste streams from greater than 
1000 ppm total organic carbon (TOC) content to less than 0.25 ppm TOC and 
inorganic salts from greater than 1000 mg/l total dissolved solids (TDS) to less 
than 50 mg/l TDS. 

- Physicochemical methods for primary treatment of wastewater to reduce TOC 
concentration from 1000 ppm to less than 50 ppm and TDS from 1000 mg/l to less 
than 100 mg/l. 
- Methods of processed water post-treatment to reduce TOC from 100 ppm to less 
than 0.25 ppm, to reduce TDS from 150 mg/l to less than 50 mg/l, and to reduce 
microorganisms from > 10 million colony forming units (CFU) per ml to one CFU 
per ml. 
- Methods to optimize two-phase fluid movement, measurement and phase separation 
of gases and liquids in a microgravity environment. 
- Development of nitrifying bioreactors capable of at least 75 percent 
nitrification of a 1000 ppm ammonium feedstream. 
- Methods to enhance oxygenation of water in a microgravity environment, 
specifically to levels above 25 ppm dissolved oxygen. 
- Methods of cold sterilization, including filtration, ultraviolet radiation and 
in situ-generated hydrogen peroxide. 
- Non-expendable methods to control urine solids formation (e.g., calcium 
phosphate), compatible with a bioprocessing system (i.e., no acid). 
- Methods to minimize or limit biofilm formation on fluid handling components 
(such as electromechanical flowmeters, regulators, checkvalves, etc). 
- Methods to enhance biofilm formation on polymeric and/or ceramic substrates in 
metal housings. 

Waste Management.  Biological and physicochemical technologies for recovering 
resources (e.g., carbon dioxide, water, nitrogen, hydrogen, ethylene, etc.) from 
wastes (trash, plant biomass, human fecal wastes, etc.).  Existing technology 
examples follow for which significant improvements may be proposed, but new 
technology approaches are encouraged. 

- Waste stabilization and pretreatment, including but not limited to 
microbial control techniques and waste fluidization. 
- Waste processing techniques such as, but not limited to, incineration, 
aerobic biodigestion, anaerobic biodigestion, wet oxidation, supercritical 
oxidation, steam reforming, electrochemical oxidation and catalytic 
oxidation.  Any effective waste treatment technology can be considered. 
- Product and by-product post-treatment technologies that eliminate undesirable 
by-products such as nitric oxide and sulfur dioxide and stabilize the product 
for storage. 

Plant Growth and Food Production.  Technologies for the controlled environment 
production of crop plants to produce food and to contribute to the reclamation 
of water, purification of air, and recovery of resources. 

- Crop Lighting: 1) sources for plant lighting such as, but not limited to, 
high-efficiency lamps or solar collectors; 2) transmission and distribution 
systems for plant lighting including, but not limited to, luminaires, light 
pipes and fiber optics; and 3) heat removal techniques for the plant growth 
lighting such as, but not limited to, water-jackets, water barriers, and 
wavelength-specific filters and reflectors. 
- Water and nutrient delivery systems, including 1) technologies for production 
of crops using hydroponics or solid substrates; 2) water and nutrient management 
systems; 3) sanitation methods to prevent excessive build-up of microorganisms 
within nutrient delivery systems; 4) regenerable media for seed germination 
plant support; 5) separation and recovery of usable minerals from wastewater and 
solid waste products for use as a source of mineral nutrients for plant growth. 
- Mechanization and automation of propagation, seeding, and plant biomass 
processing.  Plant biomass processing includes harvesting, separation of 
inedibles from edibles, cleaning and storage of edibles (seed, vegetable, and 
tubers) and removal of inedibles for resource recovery processing. 
- Facility or system sanitation methods to prevent excessive build-up of 
microorganisms within nutrient delivery systems. 
- Health measurement of plant growth systems from parameters such as rate of 
photosynthesis, transpiration, respiration, nutrient uptake.  Data acquisition 
should be non-invasive or remotely sensed using spectral, spatial, and image 
analysis.  System modeling and decision-making algorithms may be included. 

Sensors.  Significant improvements in accuracy, operational reliability, real-
time multiple measurement functions, in-line operation, self-calibration, 
reduction of expendables, and low energy consumption for monitoring and control 
of the life support processes.  Species of interest include nutrient composition 
of plant growth hydroponic delivery systems, dissolved gases and ions in water 
reclamation processes, and atmospheric gaseous constituents (oxygen, carbon 
dioxide, water vapor, and trace gas contaminants) in air revitalization 
processes.  Both invasive and non-invasive techniques will be considered. 

10.02 Space Crew Accommodations and Performance Enhancements 
Lead Center: JSC  
Participating Center(s): none 

The goal of this subtopic is improving crew and ground operations performance 
and productivity in a system context, documenting the cost-effectiveness of the 
improvements; and developing innovative concepts in crew accommodations, 
equipment, and computer-based support which will enable complex, future human 
space missions including missions of 5 years without resupply. 

As NASA develops new operational capabilities to support multiple manned 
missions, and long duration and long distance missions, dramatic improvements 
will be needed in crew and ground operations performance and productivity.  The 
crew will be increasingly autonomous from the ground, with significant control 
and maintenance responsibilities.  However, the crew will not have the time or 
expertise to function primarily as operators in an onboard control center or as 
maintenance personnel.  Science activities and operations will produce large 
volumes of data that will influence decisions about subsequent science 
activities and operations.  Responsibility for updating operations software and 
associated data and knowledge bases will shift from software specialists to 
engineers, operations personnel and crew.  Communications constraints and 
increased autonomy will limit ground support.  Budgetary constraints and mission 
complexity will drive innovations in system design, crew accommodations and 
equipment to make ground support, mission preparation and training more 
productive.  Specific areas of interest for innovations in space crew 
accommodations and performance enhancements include: 

Human Factors 
Methods to better predict and analyze crew performance and environmental 
variables will facilitate effective mission planning and task/function 
allocation.  Better equipment for crew support will enable enhanced performance.  
Specific areas of interest for innovations in human factors areas include: 

- Advanced methods for collecting and analyzing human performance with minimal 
human operator involvement.  For example, methods for automatically identifying 
categories of performance from videotaped records, such as time spent at a given 
task, time spent in translation, and time spent in interaction with other crew 
members. 
- New technology in the area of passive human posture, position tracking, and 
kinematics in 3D capable of accuracy better than 5 mm, with sample rates greater 
than 50 Hz for the whole body, all the major limbs, and head. 
- Technologies or tools to evaluate, measure or enhance habitability including 
spacecraft interior layout, illumination and material reflectivity, and 
lightweight acoustic control methods.  An area of special interest would be in 
techniques for reconfiguring spacecraft habitable areas including stowage, 
galley, sleep compartments, waste management systems, etc., for optimal use in 
both micro-g during transit to a planetary surface, and in partial-g on the 
planetary surface. 
- New technology for illumination modeling, evaluation, and design with 
particular attention to real-time displays of shadowing, glare, bloom, and 
energy distribution. 

Food and Food Preparation Systems 
- Extended duration missions require food with 3 to 5 years of shelf life.  
This shelf life extension may be accomplished through packaging and preservation 
technologies which minimize waste, and improve acceptability and food safety. 
- Long shelf life palatable dairy products are needed. 
- Food packaging waste is a problem for all missions and methods for reducing 
food waste are desired.  Food waste on Shuttle is currently returned to Earth 
for disposal.  Edible/biodegradable packaging is desirable. 
- Advanced food preparation equipment and processes for heating, chilling, 
rehydration, ease of handling in micro-gravity, and food service onboard space 
vehicles are also needed, including advanced ovens such as advanced microwave 
systems, advanced convection systems, induction systems, and combined systems.  
Current capabilities include a forced air convection oven for Shuttle and a 
microwave/forced air convection oven is being developed for the International 
Space Station. 
- Processing and preparation of chamber-grown wheat, rice, soybeans, sweet 
potatoes and potatoes into edible foods in partial gravity (1/6 - 1/3 g) is a 
high priority for planetary based missions.  Methods for converting these crops 
to edible ingredients and/or foods in a closed environment, while optimizing 
crew time, volume, power, water usage, and generated waste are needed.  Products 
of interest include oil, sugar, and meat and dairy analogs. 
- Advanced methods of flavor enhancement including condiments. 

Crew Equipment 
- Personal hygiene systems in a zero-gravity environment.  Examples: total body 
cleaning, hand washing; hair grooming, cleansing agents compatible with closed-
loop life support systems. 
- Personal crew equipment: flame and soil resistant clothing, portable lighting, 
safety and emergency equipment, and body and equipment restraints. 
- Housekeeping for zero-gravity including: habitat cleaning, high efficiency 
trash compaction and containment systems, apparel cleaning, particulate 
reduction and control, and cleansing agents compatible with closed-loop life 
support systems. 
- Tools, techniques, and software for an in-flight maintenance system to 
maintain a complex system, including expert diagnostics, in-flight manufacturing 
tools/techniques. 

Crew Training and Space and Ground Operations 
Dramatic improvements will be needed in crew and ground operations performance 
and productivity as NASA develops new operational capabilities to support 
multiple manned missions, and long duration and long distance missions.  
Robotic, vehicle and support systems will be required to be more robust, 
autonomous and intelligent, and more maintainable.  These capabilities will 
allow operators to "buy time" by increasing system mean time between failures, 
predicting when intervention will be needed, managing degraded operations, and 
using functional redundancy.  Advanced capabilities for information and data 
analysis and presentation, onboard planning, execution and fault management will 
be needed to assist the crew.  Sophisticated training and maintenance support 
systems and a robust knowledge base will be needed onboard, and will need to be 
well integrated with increasingly advanced control and maintenance systems.  
Ground support operations will need to be redesigned to support the increasing 
autonomy of space systems and onboard crew.  There will need to be advanced 
support for distributed and adjustable command responsibility, and distributed 
and flexible training.  Significantly more productive and intuitive approaches 
are needed for updating, adapting, testing and certifying advanced distributed 
operations software and knowledge bases during missions.  Specific areas of 
interest in the areas of crew training, and in flight and ground operations, 
include: 

Crew Training and Maintenance Support Systems 
- Flexible training and tutoring systems for mission operations support, 
including distributed cooperative training, virtual reality training, 
intelligent computer-based training, and authoring tools. 
- Integration of training with advanced control and maintenance systems. 
- Tools to collect/capture and tailor design-time information for use in 
developing training materials. 
- Procedures or technology for evaluating effectiveness of innovative 
training methods. 
- Data Management, Data Analysis, and Presentation and Human Interaction.
- Methods for selecting and summarizing vehicle systems and payload data 
relating to status and events, to support crew and ground awareness, operational 
decision-making, and management by exception and opportunity rather than by 
continuous or scheduled monitoring. 
- Human interaction methods for collaboration, cooperation and supervision 
of intelligent semi-autonomous systems. 
- Goal-driven collaborative data analysis systems capable of adaptation and 
learning. 
- Simple systems for notification and coordination, including natural 
language interfaces. 
- Immersive environments: real-time environments to enhance a human operator's 
ability to interact with large quantities of complex data, especially at distant 
locations. 
- Intelligent data analysis techniques: capabilities to interpret, explain, 
explore, and classify large quantities of heterogeneous data. 

Robust Planning, Operations, Fault Detection, and Recovery with Distributed 
Adjustable Command Responsibility 
- Onboard planning, sequencing, monitoring, and re-planning of activities, 
including systems and crew activities. 
- Flexible management of the actions of subsystems within the larger context 
of system flight rules and constraints. 
- Flexible and robust fault management approaches that use system models, 
"buy time" for human intervention and maintenance, and learn from human 
operators during and after the interventions. 
- Approaches to distributed and adjustable command responsibilities among 
systems, crew and ground. 
- Model-based continuous estimation of the likelihood of critical events, 
including human errors, to provide warnings of potential events and their 
consequences, and to suggest appropriate countermeasures. 
- Integration of systems for fault management, maintenance and training. 
- Operations Knowledge Management and Software Updating. 
- Systems and processes for crew and ground operators to quickly and effectively 
define, update, test and certify operational knowledge and rule bases before and 
during missions, designed for reuse in autonomous systems and in training. 
- Tools for incorporating and using engineering data and specifications (about 
equipment and its operating modes and failures and about operations procedures) 
into operations knowledge and model-based autonomous systems. 
- Tools and environments to support modification and validation of knowledge 
bases (models of activities, equipment and environment)in intelligent autonomous 
software by operators, to capture methods and knowledge used by operators during 
interventions and to collaboratively adapt to unanticipated circumstances. 
- Simulation environments and tools for use in designing and testing intelligent 
semi-autonomous systems. 

10.03 On-Board Human Health Maintenance, and Countermeasures 
Lead Center: JSC  
Participating Center(s): ARC, DFRC, JPL 

Human presence in space requires an understanding of the effects of microgravity 
and other components of the space environment on the physiological systems of 
the body and on the psychology of the crew.  A variety of environmental 
monitoring and biomedical activities to protect crew health and to counter the 
effects of space on human physiology is required.  Countermeasures must be 
developed to oppose the deleterious changes that occur in space or upon return 
to Earth.  Health care and medical intervention also must be provided over 
extended duration missions.  As launch costs are extremely sensitive to mass and 
volume, sensors and instruments must be small and light with an emphasis on 
multi-functional aspects.  Low-power consumption is a major consideration, as 
are design enhancements to improve the operation, design reliability, and 
maintainability of these instruments in microgravity.  As the efficient 
utilization of time is extremely important, innovative instrumentation setup, 
ease of usage, improved astronaut (patient) comfort, non-invasive sensors, and 
easy-to-read information displays are all-important considerations. 

Major research disciplines include: endocrinology, immunology, hematology, 
microbiology, muscle physiology, pharmacology, drug delivery systems, and 
mechanistic changes in neurovestibular, cardiovascular, and pulmonary 
physiology. 

Human Health Monitoring and Countermeasures 
- Methods and equipment to maintain and assess levels of aerobic and anaerobic 
physical capability. 
- Methods to monitor physical activity and loads placed on different segments of 
the human body. 
- Exercise equipment able to load the musculoskeletal and cardiovascular systems 
and monitor, record, and provide feedback about performance. 
- Approaches for sustaining, maximizing, assessing, and modeling individual as 
well as team performance. 
- Countermeasures against deleterious changes in body systems in flight or upon 
returning to the ground.  
Changes include space adaptation syndrome effects such as space motion sickness, 
in-flight loss of muscle and bone mass, post-flight orthostatic intolerance, and 
post-flight reduction in neuromuscular coordination. 
- In Vitro methods for evaluating the effectiveness of pharmacological 
countermeasures against the cellular effects of space radiation. 
- Assessment of gas bubble formation or growth in the body after in-flight or 
ground-based decompression, and to prevent or minimize associated decompression 
sickness. 
- Approaches to achieve health care and intervention within the operational 
constraints of space flight, including pharmaceuticals having extended shelf-
life, diagnostic methods and procedures, medical monitoring, dental care 
and surgery, and blood replacement technology. 
- In-flight procedures and techniques for assessing the human metabolism of 
proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, vitamins, and minerals. 
- In-flight specimen collection and analysis to evaluate physiological and 
metabolic and pharmacological responses of astronauts.  Non-invasive methods to 
measure crew performance and related factors. 
- Novel software methods for documentation, storage, retrieval, analysis, and 
diagnosis of crew health. 
- Microgravity refrigeration systems for the storage of biological samples and 
incorporating refrigerants acceptable for use in a spacecraft environment.  
Development of virtual training tools to enhance adaptability of sensory-motor 
functions. 

Non-Invasive Instrumentation 
- Instrumentation to be used for in-flight and ground-based studies for reliable 
and accurate non-invasive monitoring of human physiological functions such as 
the cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, neurological, gastrointestinal, pulmonary, 
immuno-hematological, and hematological systems. 
- Instruments to provide a) quantitative data to establish the effectiveness 
of an exercise regimen in ground-based research and b) measure of bone strain in 
the hip, heel, and lumbar spine during exercise. 
- Smart sensors capable of sensor data processing and sensor reconfiguration. 
- Ultrasonic doppler systems for blood flow analysis. 
- Virtual medical instrumentation. 
- Automated biomedical analysis. 
- Analysers for measurement of blood, urine, and respiratory gas volumes in 
microgravity. 
- Non-invasive, biosensors for real-time monitoring blood chemistry, gases, 
calcium ions, electrolytes, cellular components, proteins, lipids, and hormones. 
- Real time, in-vitro, urine chemistry sensors for automated urine chemistry 
analysis in a smart toilet. 

Telemedicine 
Telemedicine, the integration of telecommunications, computer, and medical 
technologies, permits NASA medical doctors and researchers on Earth to monitor 
the health and physiology of astronauts in space.  Innovative technologies are 
being sought to support the current flight programs (Space Shuttle and the 
International Space Station), and future Space exploration programs.  
Telemedicine air/ground communications are supported through available 
spacecraft communication channels for voice, video, and data.  Innovations in 
the following areas of telemedicine technology are being sought. 

- Biomedical monitoring and sensing involves the acquisition, processing, 
communication, and display of electrical, physical, or chemical aspects of a 
human's health or physiologic state.  This mode of telemedicine may be used for 
real time monitoring or for store-and-forward applications. 
- Autonomous systems for support of medical care and training, where the 
experience of experts on the ground is programmed into a computer system to 
provide that expertise to flight personnel in space. 

The following telemedicine enhancing technologies are of particular interest: 

- Small, portable, medical diagnostic equipment (digital X-ray and ultrasound 
imaging systems) capable of being deployed and used in space, with provision for 
downlinking the data to physicians on the ground.  Small, low power, wireless 
communication systems, for bidirectional data/ command communication between 
instrumented astronauts and spacecraft subsystems. 
- Advanced human/computer interface systems for improved immersion in virtual 
and augmented realities in support of medical operations. 
- Expert systems to support medical diagnosis and treatment. 
- Virtual reality medical training system to support in-flight training on 
medical diagnosis and procedures. 
- Augmented reality supervisory system to support medical treatment and minor 
surgery. 
- Improved data mining technology for on-orbit access to medical and 
training databases. 
- Reliable means for remote assessment of the emotional state and operational 
efficiency of crew members during long duration space flight. 

10.04 Spacecraft Environmental Monitoring for Crew Health 
Lead Center: JSC  
Participating Center(s): JPL 

Long-term manned space missions require continuous environmental monitoring to 
protect crew health.  Research disciplines include cell biology, clinical 
chemistry, endocrinology, immunology, hematology, microbiology, muscle 
physiology, pharmacology, nutrition, radiation biology, toxicology, and air and 
water quality.  Quantitative assessments require innovative, space flight-
compatible approaches for environmental health monitoring and clinical 
laboratory operations.  Special instruments are needed to assess the overall 
acceptability of the environment for human habitation.  In addition, methods are 
needed for determining thresh holds for unacceptable atmospheric contamination 
levels and for assessing associated risks.  Specific areas of interest include:

- In-flight monitoring of the chemical, microbial, and physical quality of the 
spacecraft environment, including recycled water, atmosphere, food, and 
surfaces.  Of particular interest are the detection, quantitative measurement, 
and removal of organic contaminants and the assessments of potential health 
effects for low level contamination. 
- Real-time and quantitative broad spectrum or target compound-specific 
analyzers for trace contaminants in spacecraft atmospheres and/or recycled 
water.  These instruments must be compact, feature low power consumption, low 
maintenance, highly automated (requiring minimal crew intervention) and must be 
functional for long periods of time. 
- There is a current need for new sensors to quantify levels of hydrogen cyanide 
in the spacecraft atmosphere. 
- Maintenance of microbial quality of the atmosphere, water and surfaces during 
space flight and means of assessing their effectiveness, including new, clinical 
microbiology methods for rapid identification of pathogens, methods for easuring 
bio-films and novel systems for sterilization. 
- In-flight monitoring of non-ionizing, neutron and charged particle radiation 
for determining interior and exterior environment of manned spacecraft, organ 
doses and the cytogenetic and carcinogenetic effects of protons and heavy ions, 
especially at low doses; measurement of effectiveness of radio-protectants and 
development of new biological and chemical radio-protectants against acute and 
late cellular effects of particulate and high energy cosmic radiation at 
cellular and organism level; development of biomarkers and amplified assays for 
measuring radiosensitivity and genetic damages by charged particles in human 
cells; development of computer biophysical models for organ dose calculation and 
for extrapolation of radiation data from cell to organism and from animal to 
human. 
- Miniaturized optical sensors (infrared, ultraviolet, or visible light), 
electrochemical sensors, and biological sensors for measuring chemical 
contaminants in the atmosphere or water systems.  These sensors are used for 
providing outputs for caution and warning, support of control functions, or 
safety precautionary measures. 
- Selected methods for biomedical testing, sampling, and some inflight analysis 
are needed to understand the effect of the spacecraft environment on human 
physiology. 

10.05 Extravehicular Activity Productivity 
Lead Center: JSC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Advanced extravehicular activity (EVA) systems are necessary for the successful 
support of future human space missions.  Complex missions require innovative 
approaches for maximizing human productivity and for providing the capability to 
perform useful work tasks.  Requirements include reduction of system hardware 
weight and volume; increased hardware reliability, durability, and operating 
lifetime (before resupply, recharge and maintenance, or replacement is 
necessary); reduced hardware and software costs; increased human comfort; and 
less restrictive work performance capability in the space environment, in 
hazardous ground-level contaminated atmospheres, or in extreme ambient thermal 
environments.  All proposed Phase-I research must lead to specific Phase-II 
experimental development that could be integrated into a functional EVA system.  
Additional design information on advanced EVA systems can be found in the EVA 
Technology Roadmap of the EVA Project Plan.  Areas in which innovations are 
solicited include the following: 

Environmental Protection 
- Radiation protection technologies that protect the suited crewmember from 
radiation particles. 
- Puncture protection technologies that provide self-sealing capabilities 
when a puncture occurs and minimizes punctures and cuts from sharp objects. 
- Dust and abrasion protection materials to exclude dust and withstand 
abrasion. 
- Thermal insulation suitable for use in low ambient pressure, including the 
gaseous environment of Mars and the hard vacuum environments of the Moon and low 
Earth orbit. 

EVA Mobility 
- Space suit gloves, produced with size-reproducible manufacturing processes, 
that provide highly dexterous hand, fingers, and thumb mobility and tactile 
sensitivity, and that incorporate active thermal control capability for removing 
and/or adding heat, depending upon external ambient thermal conditions and hand-
grasp surface temperature. 
- Space suit soft joints that provide dual-axis capability and low torque in 
rotational components and that also minimize stowage volume, and that are 
lightweight, low cost, and large range. 
- Space suit shoulder that can accommodate large range of suit pressures from 
3.5 to 8.3 psi, and is low torque, lightweight, and low cost. 
- Space suit low profile waist-bearing that maximizes torso rotation that is 
necessary for partial gravity mobility requirements and is also lightweight and 
low cost. 

Life Support System 
- Long-life and high-capacity chemical oxygen storage systems for an emergency 
supply of oxygen for breathing. 
- Low-venting or non-venting regenerable individual life support subsystem(s) 
concepts for crewmember cooling, heat rejection, and removal of expired water 
vapor and carbon dioxide. 
- Fuel cell technology that can provide power to a space suit. 
- Convection and freezable radiators that will be low cost and weight for 
thermal control. 
- Space water membrane evaporators for a space suit. 
- Innovative garments that provide direct thermal control to crewmember. 
- High reliability pumps and fans which will provide flow for a space suit but 
can be stacked to give greater flow for a vehicle. 
- CO2 and humidity control devices which, while minimizing expendables, function 
in a CO2 environment. 
- Variable conductance flexible suit garment that can function as a radiator for 
high metabolic loads and as an insulator for low metabolic loads. 

Sensors/Communications/Cameras 
- Information displays and input and output interfaces for use by the EVA-
suited individual, including displays for obtaining status information of and/or 
controlling systems performance or work-task related equipment.  
Preference is to avoid visual displays since the visual input channel of the 
crewmember is potentially near saturation. 
- CO2, bio-med, and core temperature sensors with reduced size, lightweight, 
increased reliability, and packaging flexibility. 
- IR camera that displays temperature of environment for safe handling of 
objects and are integratable into a spacesuit. 
- Visual camera that provides excellent environment awareness for crewmember and 
public and are integratable into a spacesuit that is light weight and low power. 
- Microphone on glove that detects flows and proper operation of equipment by 
glove sound sensors. 
- Mini-mass spectrometer that detects N2, CO2, NH4, O2, and hydrazine partial 
pressures. 
- Radio/laser communications that provides good communications among crew and 
base that is lightweight and low power. 

Integration 
- Robotics interfaces that permit autonomous robot control by voice control 
via EVA. 
- Minimum gas loss airlock providing quick exit and entry. 
- Recharge and checkout systems that lower EVA overhead time for crew. 
- Work tools that assist the EVA crewmember during movement in zero-gravity and 
at worksites. Specifically, devices that provide temporary attachments, that 
rigidly restrain equipment to other equipment and the EVA crewmember, and that 
contain provisions for tethering and storage of loose articles such as tool 
sockets and extensions. 
- Surface mobility devices for EVA crewmembers. 

10.06 Thermal Control Systems for Human Space Missions 
Lead Center: JSC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Thermal control is an essential part of any space vehicle, as it provides the 
necessary thermal environment for the crew and equipment to operate efficiently 
during the mission.  The requirements for human-rating and the specified 
temperature range (275 K - 310 K) drive the development of enabling active 
thermal control technologies to support human space exploration.  A primary goal 
is to provide advanced thermal system technologies which are highly reliable and 
possess low mass, size and power requirements (i.e., reduced cost).  Areas in 
which innovations are solicited include the following: 

- Fault tolerant fluid to fluid heat exchangers that cannot fail in a way which 
permits leakage between fluid loops. 
- Heat pumps to acquire waste heat at near 273 K and reject the heat above 300 
K. 
- Internal heat pumps to provide cabin dehumidification on-orbit with a fluid 
heat sink of 288 to 298 K. 
- Lightweight, flexible radiators which can be stowed compactly for transport 
and deployed for use. 
- Micro-meteoroid tolerant and freeze/thaw tolerant radiators. 
- Environmentally friendly, non-toxic single and two-phase working fluids that 
either freeze below 75 K or do not significantly change density upon freezing or 
thawing. 
- Two-phase transport loops and associated controls which require low power for 
operations. Thermal energy storage systems. 
- Controllable water evaporator heat rejection devices for use in vacuum 
environments. 
- Microgravity compatible refrigerator/freezer technologies and/or system 
designs for food or scientific samples storage. Also, refrigerator/freezer 
technologies and/or system designs for long-duration planetary (partial 
gravity) usage. 
- Low vibration or vibration isolating fluid components including fans, pumps, 
compressors, coolers, tubing, fittings, heat exchangers, and valves for use in 
microgravity processing applications. 
- Highly accurate, remotely monitored, in situ, non-intrusive thermal 
instrumentation for meeting in-space science, manufacturing and safety needs.
- Materials and concepts for thermally efficient containment and processing 
of hazardous materials and samples in space. 
- Advanced analytical tools for thermal design and analyses, which are amenable 
to concurrent engineering processes.

Proposers should indicate explicitly how their research is expected to improve 
the mass, power, volume, safety, reliability, and/or design and analyses 
techniques for future thermal control systems for human space missions as 
compared to state-of-the-art technologies. 

10.07 Spaceport and In-Space Cryogenic Fluids, Handling, and Storage 
Technologies 
Lead Center: KSC  
Participating Center(s): JSC, MSFC 

Advanced technologies are being solicited for cryogenic systems for multiple 
aerospace applications.  New and innovative techniques are desired in spaceport 
technologies, space environment applications, and extra-terrestrial applications 
(lunar & mars environments).  These focus areas include technologies that will 
increase the performance, operational efficiencies, safety, and reliability and 
provide for autonomous cryogenic operations in earth, space and extra-
terrestrial environments.

Spaceport Cryogenic Fluids, Handling and Storage Technologies 
Advanced technologies are being solicited for spaceport cryogenic systems for 
conditioning, storage, densification (sub-cooling) of cryogenic propellants and 
transfer & control to improve operational efficiencies, safety & reliability, 
and enable autonomous loading and off-loading operations as part of the 
spaceport Technologies Initiative.  Specific areas of interest include the 
following:

- Cryogenic pumping systems that minimize thermal losses and can be utilized in 
liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen and other cryogenic systems.  These systems 
should possess high reliability and demonstrate ease of maintainability.  These 
systems could be hermetically sealed from ambient surroundings and reduce or 
eliminate cool down requirements prior to operation and provide minimum loss in 
standby mode.  These devices should provide for defrost free maintenance, plug-
in type design and have a minimum of moving parts for increased reliability. 
- New technology valves for cryogenic applications, including LOX, LH2, and LCH4 
that minimize thermal losses and pressure drops across the component.  
Components should be adaptable to electromechanical activation and in a size 
range from 1/2 to 5 inches. 
- Leak-proof compliant cryogenic quick disconnects that can be reliably mated, 
demated, and remated under high misalignment (25-30 degrees for connectors 1-
inch and larger) and dusty/windy conditions.  Smaller connectors (1/4-inch to 1-
inch) that require a low connecting force (for Mars applications) are critical.  
Reconnect issues that must be resolved include thermal (potential icing), 
sealing (surface damage due to environmental contamination), and cleanliness 
(potentially imposed by wind, etc.). 
- Cryogenic couplings utilizing robust sealing technology that are compatible 
with cryogenic temperatures and liquid oxygen.
- New and innovative technologies to provide for propellant densification (LH2 & 
LOX).  These technologies should provide for increased efficiencies and reduced 
costs associated in producing densified (sub-cooled) propellants. 
- Propellant conditioning systems to load and maintain densified propellants on 
the spacecraft.  System should provide accurate measurement of propellants on 
board (0.5 percent of total propellant mass) and be able to maintain the 
densified condition on the spacecraft for up to six hours to accommodate crew 
ingress and long launch windows. 
- Recovery and storage system for gaseous hydrogen as vented from propellant 
storage and during vehicle loading and drainback operations. Gaseous helium 
recovery (from hydrogen stream) is also desired.  System must have bypass 
capability to preclude potential launch impact in the event of a subsystem 
anomaly. 
- Propellant servicing mechanisms including umbilical alignment, latching, and 
release mechanisms which provide reliable and verifiable single and multiple 
mating, and enable autonomous loading operations.  Integrated alignment and 
connection methods are desirable.  Innovative latching technologies such as 
shape memory alloy applications and technologies that allow for maximum preload 
with minimal application loading are also desirable. 
- Reliable, low cost liquefaction methods are needed to allow for a centralized 
production site and the transport and re-liquefaction at the launch site via 
long distance pipelines and extraterrestrial environments. 
- Flowmeters and densitometers for measurement of densified, multi-phase cryogen 
at flowrates from 1.4 to 5.6 liter per second. 
- Energy efficient, cost effective distribution systems for transfer of cryogens 
over long distances (up to several miles in distance).

Low Gravity/In-Space Environment 
Cryogenic Fluids, Handling and Storage Technologies Innovative component 
technology and/or novel system concept proposals are being solicited to improve 
the performance, operating efficiency, safety and reliability of cryogenic fluid 
management in low-gravity/in-space environments (10-6 g to 10-2 g)- including 
liquefaction, transfer/handling, and storage.  Cryogenic fluids may be utilized 
in a wide range of in-space applications, including high-energy propulsion, 
space energy storage/generation, life support, and other areas.  Also, in-space 
cryogenic propellant depots may be of particular interest for a variety of 
mission scenarios.  However, these could require in-space integration of 
separately launched depot elements (including cryogen couplings).  Moreover, 
low-pressure/sub-critical cryogenic fluids, stored for extended periods in space 
are susceptible to fluid loss through environmental heating, resulting in higher 
costs, lower performance, and limitations on the application of high-energy 
propellants for various future missions.  Technologies that provide for 
efficient long-term storage (including reduced heat conduction, active cooling, 
etc.), increased safety and reliability, and measurement, integration of depots 
from multiple, discrete elements, control and transfer of cryogenic 
fluids/propellants in low gravity in-space environments are of prime interest.  
Specific areas of interest include:

- Innovative instrumentation for monitoring a cryogen in low-gravity including 
mass quantity gauging, liquid vapor sensing and free surface imaging. 
- Advanced tank materials and structural concepts - including lightweight, low 
thermal conductivity tank strut and support concepts. 
- Lightweight, insulating thermal protection schemes. 
- Low thermal conductivity cryogenic tank penetrations, i.e., instrumentation 
feed-throughs, fluid lines, and vent lines. 
- Innovative concepts for automated cryogenic connects/disconnects and 
couplings-including connections/transfers from propellant depots to vehicles in 
a low-gravity environment. 
- Robust tank/insulation/fluid management concepts for long-life operations 
involving multiple ambient/vacuum pressure cycles.
- Innovative devices/approaches for vapor free acquisition of cryogenic liquids 
in low gravity (including magnetic fluid management concepts). 
- Small to moderate capacity, low power, lightweight cryogenic fluid transfer 
pumps for low-gravity applications. 
- Tank pressure control (e.g., thermodynamic vent), and/or integrated tank boil-
off control and liquefaction technologies.

Partial Gravity/In-Situ Cryogenic Fluids
Handling and Storage Technologies that enable the autonomous control of 
cryogenic systems, high thermal efficiencies and lightweight, autonomous 
liquefaction of cryogens for Martian (high CO2 atmosphere) and lunar environment 
are areas of focus.  Specific areas of interest include:

- Propellant transfer systems that minimize the potential for cryogenic leaks, 
as well as minimizing heat leak into the systems.  Pipe connections, flexhoses, 
pumps, valves, components and instrumentation ports are potential leak 
sources in a cryogenic system.  Minimizing these potential areas with non-
intrusive instrumentation, redundant seals or self-healing seals is greatly 
desired.  Connectors and seals must reliably maintain a less than 10 -7 standard 
cubic centimeters per second leak rate. 
- Autonomous cryogenic disconnects and couplings. 
- Lightweight thermal protection schemes. 
- Tank pressure control (e.g., thermodynamic vent) and/or integrated tank 
boiloff control and liquefaction technologies. 
- Lightweight mechanical fittings and flexhoses with low heat leak properties. 
- Low heat leak, lightweight, electromechanical shut-off valves for LO2 and LCH4 
applications in size ranges from 1 to 1.5 inches. 
- High capacity liquefaction systems for oxygen. 
- Cryocooler systems with high cooling capacity (greater than 25 watts).
- Very low heat leak oxygen dewars. 
Efficient LH2 storage systems for transporting LH2 to Mars and storage on the 
Martian surface.

10.08 Terrestrial and Planetary Spaceport Instrumentation and Range Technologies 
Lead Center: KSC  
Participating Center(s): none 

This subtopic focuses on the development of sensors, transducers, 
instrumentation systems, meteorological and range technologies uniquely suited 
to and used at earth and planetary spaceports for processing, launch, tracking, 
controlling, and landing of space vehicles and payloads.  This subtopic also 
focuses on sensors, transducers and instrumentation systems uniquely suited for 
instrumentation test beds to be characterized as payloads on Space Shuttle or 
other future space vehicle flights as well as space and ground based range 
systems.  These test beds will be used to develop Integrated Vehicle Health 
Management System technologies with potential applications on future space 
systems.  Specifically, this solicitation subtopic includes: 

Miniature Mass Spectrometers for Hazardous Gas Detection.  Development is needed 
for small, lightweight, rugged, inexpensive, mass spectrometers or other 
technology capable of measuring one part per million to 100 percent of hydrogen, 
helium, nitrogen, oxygen, and argon in a high-vibration environment.  These 
instruments will be used on and around space launch vehicles for leak detection 
during ground processing, test firings, pre-launch propellant loading, launch, 
ascent, and descent (post reentry).  The primary improvements in technology and 
performance over current instruments are size and weight reduction, cost 
reduction, and operation in a high vibration environment.  Current instruments 
typically fill one or more equipment racks, weigh several hundred kilograms, and 
must be operated in an air conditioned, vibration free environment, typically 
several hundred feet from the potential leak locations.  Their cost, size, and 
complexity mandate that each instrument must sample multiple leak locations on 
a time-shared basis.  The target cost of an operational version of the desired 
instrument is $5,000-$20,000 each.  The needed instrument accuracy is plus or 
minus ten parts per million, or 5 percent of reading, whichever error is 
greater.  The instrument should possess mass resolution capable of meeting the 
desired accuracy goals for hydrogen in the presence of 100 percent helium, and 
for oxygen in the presence of 100 percent nitrogen.  The instrument should be 
less than 3500 cubic centimeters total volume, and have mass less than ten 
kilograms, including high-vacuum pump.  The instrument should be able to 
withstand 18 G vibration over a range of 5-2500 Hz for 15 minutes, each axis, 
without damage.  The instrument should be capable of meeting the specified 
accuracy requirements for twelve hours without calibration.  It should be 
capable of analyzing all five specified gases and providing the concentration of 
each within one second.  While advances are primarily sought in development of 
complete instruments, advances in key enabling technology such as vacuum pumps, 
ionizers, and detectors are also sought. 

Portable Hydrazine Vapor Sensors.  Development is needed for portable direct-
reading sensors, which can rapidly and accurately measure hydrazine and 
monomethyl hydrazine vapors over a range of 1 to 1000 parts per billion (ppb).  
The sensor should be easily carried and operated by one environmental health 
technician, and thus the mass of the sensor should not exceed one kilogram and 
the maximum volume 3500 cubic centimeters.  The instrument should be capable of 
accurately measuring the target vapors with a maximum error from all sources of 
plus or minus two parts per billion or ten percent of reading, whichever error 
is greater.  The instrument should respond to a positive or negative change of 
concentration in less than 60 seconds to achieve 90 percent of the accurate 
final reading when exposed to concentrations of 10 to 1000 ppb hydrazine or 
monomethyl hydrazine vapor in normal air.  The sensor should not give a false 
hydrazines indication greater than 5 ppb in response to other chemicals such as 
nitrogen dioxide, isopropyl alcohol, ammonia, and carbon dioxide at of their 
respective allowable concentration time weighted averages (TWA) as defined by 
the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH).  The 
sensor should be capable of operating in 0-50 degree C air having a relative 
humidity range of 10 to 90 percent.  The sensor should require 15 minutes or 
less warm-up time to reach full performance level, operate without requiring 
either calibration or maintenance for 3 months, and be capable of continual 
operation up to 16 hours.  Current portable hydrazine sensor technologies 
require more than 10 minutes to achieve 90 percent of final reading when 
exposed to 10 ppb monomethyl hydrazine vapor and require calibration 
approximately every 30 days. 

In Situ Test Bed Micro Sensors.  The development of Mars In Situ Propellant 
Production (ISPP) systems requires lightweight, low power micro-sensors for use 
on space flight test beds to detect H2, CO, CO2, O2, CH4, Argon, and N2.  
Applications include Mars ground fuel production systems and hydrocarbon based 
rocket engines.  For all sensors, the following specifications apply, including 
electronics, to give an output in engineering units or a high level electrical 
output.  Volume, < 20 cc; Weight, < 20 grams; Power, < 0.3 watts; Range, 0 - 100 
percent (v/v); Accuracy, +/- 0.5 percent; Response Time, < 10 seconds for a 90 
percent response to a step change.  The devices should survive vibration to 20g 
RMS (5 - 2500 Hz) and shock to 40g for 11ms.  The operating temperature ranges 
should be: H2, 0 to 500 degrees C; CO, 0 to 1000 degrees C; CO2, -80 to 1000 
degrees C; O2 -80 to 1000 degrees C; CH4, -80 to 500 degrees C; Argon, -80 to 
400 degrees C; N2, -80 to 400 degrees C.  Also required is electromagnetic 
compatibility per MIL-STD-461 C.  All specifications should be met for an 
unattended operating period of at least 3 years.  Integration of several sensors 
into a single package is highly desirable.  Useful application groupings would 
be for (H2, CO2, CO, CH4, and O2) and (CO2, Argon, and N2).  Current state of 
the art can meet size and weight requirements for combustible gases, but does 
not separate the individual gases in mixtures, as several of them are 
combustible (H2, CH4 and CO), and often require higher levels of power for 
heated detector elements, such as oxygen sensors.  Infrared-based systems do not 
meet size, weight and power restrictions, and can not measure several of the 
gases requested.  Mass spectrometers can measure all of these gases, but the 
size, weight and power requirements are excessive, especially with the vacuum 
pumps included.
 
10.09 Process/Industrial Engineering Technologies 
Lead Center: KSC  
Participating Center(s): ARC 

Spacecraft launch and payload processing systems have many unique aspects which 
require development of innovative process or industrial engineering (IE) 
technologies in order to obtain the substantial benefits derived from applying 
IE principles in other industries.  Process/Industrial Engineering is a 
technical discipline devoted to the science of process improvement and 
optimization of operational phases of complex systems.  The Space Shuttle is 
NASA's first major program with a long-term operational phase.  All major 
current and potential future human space flight programs (the International 
Space Station, X-vehicles, and Mars missions) are also projected to have lengthy 
operational phases.  Payload processing activities are also emphasizing 
repeatable processes and improved customer satisfaction.  Therefore, the 
strategic importance of IE technologies to NASA is rapidly increasing.  Advanced 
spaceport technologies for designing, improving, and managing processes are 
needed to support spacecraft ground processing at KSC.  Process/Industrial 
Engineering proposals should address the generic challenges of delivering safer, 
better, faster, and cheaper products/services.  Proposals should also identify 
potential applications for enhancing the operational phases of new NASA programs 
and aviation depot maintenance processes.  Advanced process/industrial 
engineering technologies should support NASA's goal of achieving safe, reliable, 
and low cost space access.  Proposals may address the development of new 
concepts, methodologies, processes, and/or software support systems which 
advance the state-of-the-art in one or any combination of the following general 
areas of interest: operations research; process simulation modeling; statistical 
process control; planning and scheduling systems; project management risk 
analysis; decision analysis; cost-benefit analysis; task/work methods analysis; 
work measurement; human factors engineering; ergonomics; performance metrics; 
management information systems; and benchmarking.  Specific interests for the 
2000 solicitation include, but are not limited to, those listed below: 

- Advanced task/methods analysis and procedure design techniques for complex, 
relatively long-duration, and infrequent test and checkout activities. 
- Development of computer-based training for writing human-centered procedures.  
Development of evaluation and testing methods and metrics for procedure re-
design. 
- Advanced technologies for generating and delivering effective test and 
checkout procedures.  Knowledge based tools and methods for providing highly 
effective just-in-time task level training in the operational environment. 
- Advanced technologies to enable easy, affordable development of graphical 
tools to train new engineers on Space Shuttle subsystems. 
- Tools to measure and improve human-computer interaction with consoles and 
portable data collection devices. 
- Web-based scheduling technologies to improve range, vehicle, and payload 
processing systems by supporting reduced cycle time, reduced resource 
requirements, more robust schedules, timely feedback of process/task 
completion, enhanced applicability to other domains and to new vehicles, and 
more explicit knowledge representation. 
- Advanced operations research and human factors engineering tools for 
optimizing utilization of scarce resources and minimizing the potential for 
human error during aircraft/reusable spacecraft (Shuttle and X-vehicles) 
maintenance activities. 
- Advanced statistical quality control techniques for ensuring high quality, 
affordable manufacturing and maintenance of unique spacecraft hardware.  
Automated statistical quality control techniques that can be applied to data 
generated by space vehicle health monitoring systems. 
- Advanced operations process modeling, simulation, verification and validation 
technologies for cost-effective evaluation of the impacts of proposed changes to 
operational processes and procedures.  Tools for rapidly assessing cost, 
schedule, and technical risks of proposed Shuttle hardware/software upgrades and 
process changes. 
- Tools to identify the parameters needed to quantify logistics mass and 
volume required to support a human Mars, lunar, or asteroid mission.  Parameters 
include, but are not limited to, spares, tools, test equipment, maintenance 
consumables, and crew food and water.  Tools should identify the typical system, 
subsystem, and line replaceable unit failure rates, mass, and volume 
characteristics to be used as input parameters for estimating logistics 
requirements until mission specific hardware data is available.  Develop a model 
that utilizes these parameters to estimate logistics mass and volume 
requirements for a specific mission and then optimizes the spares mix based on 
cost, mass, volume, or system availability once the detailed mission specific 
hardware data set is available. 
- Develop concepts for autonomous fabrication of parts from raw materials.  
Study availability of raw materials at the landing site of current or future 
programs and availability of materials from depleted systems or carried along in 
the complement of mission stores.  Define a candidate list of parts that could 
be manufactured from available materials en-route or at the landing site.  
Utilize commonality of hardware to facilitate interchangeability of parts and 
limit the number of unique parts.  Decide which types of raw materials to carry 
along on a mission to complement the raw materials at the destination.  Study 
types of devices and systems needed for manufacturing.  Develop techniques for 
stowage, transportation, and utilization of space-borne manufacturing equipment. 

10.10 Flight/Ground System Autonomous Operations 
Lead Center: JSC  
Participating Center(s): GSFC 

Development of spacecraft with ground systems that support a high degree of 
onboard autonomy, possessing autonomous navigation and control, self-monitoring 
systems, intelligent agents, and smart instruments will enhance the efficiency 
of upcoming NASA flights.  The challenges include selective migration of control 
center operations functions to the spacecraft, new onboard software architecture 
and operating system concepts to integrate these functions, and new software 
design methodologies.  Overcoming these challenges will enable the planning, 
design, development, and operation of challenging observational or exploration 
missions with reduced human involvement.  NASA seeks innovations that 
demonstrate the following characteristics: spacecraft and instruments appearing 
as nodes on a network; interoperable ground and flight operating systems; 
spacecraft interfaces that appear the same to ground support systems; ground 
system operations requiring minimal hands-on effort; centralized anomaly 
resolution; and direct delivery of science data to users.  Areas of interests 
include: 

- Autonomous guidance, navigation, and control. 
- Planning, scheduling, and resource management. 
- Onboard data management. 
- Fault detection and recovery. 
- Onboard software architectures and operating systems. 
- Design, testing, and validation tools or techniques for autonomous systems. 
- Direct access or on-demand access to and control of instruments and their 
returned data by the investigators. 
- Distributed intelligent agents for automation of spacecraft and ground 
operations functions. 
- Autonomous instrument operations. 
- Advanced applications of expert system, model-based, and agent-based 
technologies in mission-operations system design and operations monitoring. 
- Internet-based and Java-based approaches to mission operations. 
- Advanced data and information visualization techniques for mission 
operations. 
- Techniques for electronic documentation, electronic process control, 
massive distributed databases, intelligent archiving and retrieval, data 
analysis and visualization and other advanced information management 
technologies. 
- End-to-end goal-oriented planning, commanding, and reporting. 

Innovations should use commercial standards for development, off-the-shelf 
hardware and software when possible, and have a high degree of commercialization 
potential. 

11 Enable the Commercial Development of Space 

Commerce is essential to human society; free market transactions are the 
foundation of the dramatic progress humankind has made during the past several 
centuries.  Wherever humans go and wherever they live, there too is commerce.  
Moreover, the free market is the most effective mechanism for delivering 
tangible benefits from space broadly to the American people.  If humanity is to 
explore and develop space, to better exploit the space environment for profound 
scientific discoveries, and to someday settle the space frontier, it will only 
be through the continuing expansion of the private sector-of individuals and of 
industry-into space.  As we open the space frontier, we must therefore seek to 
expand the free market into space.  It is a goal of NASA to enable the 
commercial development of space.  

11.01 Commercial Microgravity Research 
Lead Center: MSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

In accordance with the Space Act, as amended, to "seek and encourage to the 
maximum extent possible the fullest commercial use of space," NASA facilitates 
the use of space and microgravity for commercial products and services.  
The products may utilize information from in-space activities to enhance an 
Earth-based effort, or may require in-space manufacturing.  This subtopic has 
two goals.  First, the commercial demonstration of pivotal technologies or 
processes; second, the development of associated infrastructure equipment for 
commercial experimentation and operations in space, or the transfer of these 
technologies to industry in space or on Earth.  Automated processes and hardware 
(robotics) which will reduce crew time are a priority.  All agency activity in 
microgravity including those in life science and microgravity sciences, which 
lead to commercial products and services, are of interest.  Some specific areas 
for which proposals are sought include: 

Biotechnology and Agribusiness 
Biotechnology, biomedical and agricultural instrumentation or techniques that 
exploit space-derived capabilities or data to support the commercial development 
of space by the agricultural, medical or pharmaceutical industry.  This 
includes, in particular: 

- Portable Biological Sensors -The need for sensing devices that can detect 
and identify biological pathogens (airborne or in-vivo) is desired to support 
NASA's mission for a permanent presence of man in space 
- Development of Noninvasive Health Monitoring Systems/models - Application 
to NASA's crew health program for extended duration missions.  For example, 1) 
novel in vitro cell-matrix models for studying the effects of microgravity on 
human tissue repair and wound healing, 2) novel organotypic skin models which 
simulate physiological changes found in humans under a microgravity environment, 
3) functional models for delineating the MG-inducible or MG-responsive pathways 
of human tissue angiogenesis (new blood vessel formation).  
- Physiological measurement in microgravity of bone growth and the immune 
system in microgravity.  
- Innovative research in plant-derived pharmaceuticals using microgravity.  
- Agricultural research, i.e., genetic manipulation of plants using 
microgravity.  
- Instrumentation or technology to explore the use of microgravity in genetic 
assay, analysis, and manipulation.  
- Instrumentation to analyze cell reactor systems and characterize cell 
structure in microgravity in order to develop enhanced drug therapies that can 
also be applied to pharmaceutical development and commercialization.  
- Innovative techniques for dynamic control and cryogenic preservation of 
protein crystals.  
- Innovations in preparation of protein crystals for X-ray diffraction 
experiments without the use of frangible materials.  

Materials Science 
- Applications using space-grown semiconductor crystals including epitaxially 
grown materials for commercial electronic devices.  The applications will also 
attempt to use the knowledge of the space-grown material behavior to enhance 
ground processing of the materials to achieve equivalent performance of space-
grown materials in electronic circuitry.  
- Applications using space-grown optical electronic materials such as fluoride 
glasses and non-linear optical compounds for commercial optical electronic 
devices and to achieve equivalent performance of space-grown materials in ground 
processing.  
- Innovations using non-linear optical material to be processed in space.  
- Innovations for new space-processed glasses for optical electronic 
applications.  

Microgravity Payloads 
- Design/develop microgravity payloads for space station applications that lead 
to commercial products or services.  
- Enabling commercial technologies that promote the human exploration and 
development of space.  
- Enabling commercial technologies through the use of ISS as a commercial test 
bed for hardware, products, or processes.  
- Enabling technology designed to reduce crew workloads and/or facilitate 
commercial investigations or processing through automation, robotics, or 
nanotechnology.  

Combustion Science 
Innovative applications in combustion research that will lead to developing 
commercial products or improved processes through the unique properties of space 
or through enhanced or innovative techniques on the ground.  

Food Technology 
Innovative applications of space research in food technology that will lead to 
developing commercial food products or improved food processes through the 
unique properties of space or through enhanced or innovative techniques on the 
ground.  

12 Share the Experience and Benefits of Discovery 

All Americans should have the opportunity to share in the experience and the 
benefits of space exploration and development.  During the past four decades, 
ambitious human space flight missions have inspired generations of young people 
to undertake careers in science, mathematics and engineering.  Benefiting both 
themselves and society.  The space program can enrich society by directly 
enhancing the quality of education.  Terrestrial applications of technologies 
developed for space have saved many lives, made possible medical breakthroughs, 
created countless jobs, and yielded diverse other tangible benefits for 
Americans.  The further commercial development of space will yield still more 
jobs, technologies, and capabilities to benefit people the world over in their 
everyday lives.  A goal of NASA is therefore to share the experience, the 
excitement of discovery, and the benefits of human space flight with all.  

12.01 Telescience and Outreach for Space Exploration 
Lead Center: MSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

NASA wants to provide to the general public, schools and industry, access to 
space and microgravity, and to information about the commercial investigations 
and results.  

Telescience.  There are many potential users for NASA services and data located 
throughout the U.S.  There are three general types of users for NASA activities.  
The first type is the principal investigator (PI) who is responsible for the 
spacecraft, experiment and attendant science and commands the payload or 
experiment.  The second type is the secondary investigator(s) who participates 
in analysis of the science and its control but does not send commands.  The 
third type is the educational user from graduate students to secondary school 
students.  These users will receive either data processed by the PI or 
unprocessed data.  Commercial investigations require the ability to receive, 
process and display telemetry, view video from science sources, including the 
ISS, and talk to NASA about the science and operations.  To conduct or be 
involved in general science activities, including the ISS science operations, a 
user will require various services from the Payload Operations Integration 
Center (POIC) located in Huntsville, Alabama, or other control centers located 
at various NASA facilities.  These services are required to enable the 
experiment to be controlled using the inputs from various video sources, 
telemetry and the crew.  Inputs allow the experimenter to send to their 
spacecraft or experiment commands to change various experiment operations.  
Before an experiment can get underway, an experimenter must participate in the 
payload planning process to schedule on board services like electricity, crew 
time and cryogenics.  This planning process is integral to the entire payload 
operation and requires the Principal Investigator or his representatives to 
participate via voice or video teleconferencing.  To enable users to operate 
from their home base, whether it is located at a laboratory, office or home, 
these services (commensurate to the level of their operation) must be provided 
at their location at a reasonable cost.  Costs include both the platform upon 
which these services will run and include the communications required to provide 
these services to the experimenter's location.  

Outreach and Education.  Another user is the general public observer who is 
interested in the science that is being conducted.  Proposals are sought which 
provide a system or systems based on commercial solutions.  These systems should 
allow outreach participation in NASA commercial programs, including the science 
and operational levels.  The public should receive data, including voice, video 
and processed data, but generally would not be allowed to interact with the 
current investigations.  Systems could provide for the general public access to 
NASA and commercial science activities and operations through low cost 
technologies, and outreach and education activities.  The systems should be 
capable of facilitating secondary and college-level students' access to and the 
ability to participate in science activities.  Similarly, the systems should be 
able to accommodate institutions and organizations which promote the use of 
science and technologies, e.g., museums and space camps.  




8.3 EARTH SCIENCE

NASA's Earth Science Enterprise uses satellites and other tools to intensively 
study the Earth in an effort to expand our understanding of how natural 
processes affect us, and how we might be affecting them. Such studies will yield 
improved weather forecasts, tools for managing agriculture and forests, 
information for fishermen and local planners, and, eventually, the ability to 
predict how the climate will change in the future. Earth Science has three main 
components: a series of Earth-observing satellites, an advanced data system, and 
teams of scientists who will study the data. Key areas of study include clouds; 
water and energy cycles; oceans; the chemistry of the atmosphere; land surface; 
water and ecosystem processes; glaciers and polar ice sheets; and the solid 
Earth. Working together with the nations of the world, Earth Science seeks to 
improve our knowledge of the Earth and to use that knowledge to the benefit of 
all humanity.

http://earth.nasa.gov


13 INSTRUMENTS FOR EARTH SCIENCE MEASUREMENTS	
13.01 Advanced Instrument Technology for Transitional Boundaries of Land and 
Water	
13.02 In Situ Terrestrial Sensors	
13.03 Special Event Imaging and Other Earth Observing Instruments	
13.04 Active Microwave	
13.05 Passive Microwave	
13.06 Active Optical	
13.07 Passive Optical	
14 PLATFORM TECHNOLOGIES FOR EARTH SCIENCE MEASUREMENTS	
14.01 Power Management and Distribution	
14.02 Advanced Communication Technologies for Near-Earth Missions	
14.03 Command and Data Handling	
14.04 Guidance, Navigation and Control	
14.05 Structures and Materials	
15 ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY	
15.01 Data Transmission from Onboard Sensors to Users	
15.02 Knowledge Discovery & Data Fusion	
15.03 Geospatial Data Analysis Processing and Visualization Technologies	
15.04 High Performance Computing and Networking	
15.05 Data Presentation Management	
15.06 Automation and Planning	






13 Instruments for Earth Science Measurements 

NASA's Earth Science Enterprise is studying how our global environment is 
changing.  Using the unique perspective available from space and airborne 
platforms, NASA is observing, documenting, and assessing large-scale 
environmental processes, with emphasis on biology and biogeochemistry of 
ecosystems and the global carbon cycle, global water and energy cycle, climate 
variability and prediction, atmospheric chemistry, and solid Earth and natural 
hazards.  A major objective of the ESE instrument development programs is to 
implement science measurement capabilities with small or more affordable 
spacecraft so that the development programs can meet multiple mission needs and 
therefore make the best use of limited resources.  The rapid development of 
small, low cost remote sensing and in situ instruments is essential to achieving 
this objective.  Consequently, the objective of the Instruments for Earth 
Science Measurements SBIR topic is to develop and demonstrate instrument 
component and subsystem technologies which, reduce the risk, cost, size, and 
development time of Earth observing instruments, and enable new Earth 
observation measurements.  The following subtopics are concomitant with this 
objective and are organized by measurement technique.  

13.01 Advanced Instrument Technology for Transitional Boundaries of Land and 
Water 
Lead Center: SSC  
Participating Center(s): none 

The Earth's transitional boundaries of land and water, the shorelines or coasts, 
comprise elements of the ecosystems marked by frequent changes and widely 
fluctuating environmental areas.  Technology is needed to better identify and 
delineate important environmental phenomena and to characterize both the change 
and impacts effecting human existence.  Example areas of study include the 
complexities and dynamics of boundaries extending several kilometers seaward or 
inland of the shoreline.  Some of the measurements required for conducting this 
research involve atmospheric measurements and in situ & in vivo measurements of 
biological, geological, chemical and physical processes including the following: 

- Both surface and subsurface water variables (e.g., chemical composition, 
nutrient content, biological/organic content, inherent and apparent optical 
properties, temperature, salinity, suspended materials) and their changes 
with depth.  
- Vegetation changes occurring on small spatial scales or for which the 
spectral response is influenced by changing water level.  
- Natural hazards (e.g., hurricanes, sea level rise) and man-induced 
pressures on land cover and land use change in near shore areas (e.g., 
particulate loading, nutrient loading).  
- Subsurface soil and sediment properties and their changes with depth in 
environments covered by vegetation or water.  
- Atmospheric variables necessary to correct remotely sensed data.  Parameters 
required for data corrections include aerosol absorption, ozone absorption, 
oxygen and water vapor absorption, atmospheric path length, Rayleigh scattering, 
aerosol size distribution and Mie scattering.  

It can be seen by current research that new innovative technologies and 
approaches are required to improve instruments, analysis tools and concepts for 
conducting coastal zone research.  Specific technological areas of focus 
include the following: 

- Airborne and ground based multispectral and hyperspectral-imaging systems 
providing improved spectral resolution (e.g., less than 10 nm bandwidths, and 
less than 1nm resolution).  Spatial resolution (e.g., less than 30 cm ground 
sampling distance) with higher sensitivities (e.g., .05 NedL) and signal to 
noise ratios (e.g., greater than 1000:1) necessary for water observations but 
with the dynamic range (e.g., albedo of .01 to .5) to include terrestrial 
observations as well.  
- Ancillary data collection for imaging systems which including the integration 
of the Global Positioning System coordinates system, platform attitude, 
altitude, radiometric and atmospheric data characteristics.  
- Improved data processing and analysis systems for image data mosaics, 
geometric correction, atmospheric correction, radiometric correction, formatting 
for ease of analysis.  
- Instruments for measuring apparent and inherent optical properties of 
rivers, lakes and oceans.  
- Improved instruments for enhancing the collection of water samples and in 
situ measurements with equipment deployed from small and large research vessels 
(e.g., profiling instruments).  
- Instruments for measuring bio-optical fluorescence of particles in water.  
- Data acquisition systems that integrate multiple sensors integrated data 
analysis software, networking of multi-sensor arrays, autonomous acquisition and 
transmission.  
- Improvements in ground penetrating radar to improve portability expand 
frequency ranges, receiver sensitivities, software analysis tools, and 
ntegration of ground penetrating radar data with other sensor systems.  
- Instruments and tools for in situ and in vivo analysis of terrestrial and 
aquatic plant bioactivity (e.g., evapotranspiration, optical properties, 
fluorescence, chlorophyll content, and nutrient uptake).  
- Instruments for collecting and analyzing bottom sediments in water for 
particle size distribution, nutrients, metals and radio-nucleides.  

13.02 In Situ Terrestrial Sensors 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): ARC 

Proposals are sought for the development of in situ measurement systems that 
will enhance the scientific utility of the Earth Science Enterprise program and 
that will broaden the uses of its systems to include products of interest to 
commercial and governmental entities around the world.  Systems that measure 
oceanic, land and atmospheric parameters either directly or near-remotely are 
desired.  Typical uses include remote sensing algorithm development and surface 
calibration and validation of sensors in space.  These measurements are critical 
to NASA and have commercial applications in the areas of environmental 
monitoring and industrial process control.  Topics of interest include: 

- Autonomous GPS-located ocean platforms to measure and transmit to remote 
terminals upper ocean and lower atmosphere properties including temperature, 
salinity, momentum, light, humidity, precipitation, and biology.  Similar sensor 
packages for use onboard ships while under way.  
- Autonomous low cost systems to measure surface and lower atmospheric 
parameters including soil moisture, precipitation, temperature, wind speed and 
humidity.  
- Systems for in situ measurements of cloud radiative properties including 
extinction, absorption, scattering phase function and phase function asymmetry.  
- Small, lightweight instruments suitable for balloon, kite, or small remotely 
piloted aircraft for in situ measurement of cloud parameters including liquid 
and ice hydrometers and atmospheric trace gases.  
- High sensitivity measurements of atmospheric trace-gas mixing ratios using 
robust instrumentation for unattended operation in harsh environments.  
- Systems and devices for measurement of atmospheric aerosol chemical, 
microphysical, and radiative properties.  Autonomy desired for ground-station 
network applications and deployment aboard aircraft.  
- Systems to measure line- and area-averaged rain rate at the surface over 
lines of at least 100 meters and areas of at least 100x100 meters.  
- Lightweight, low-power systems that integrate the functions of inertial 
navigation systems and GPS receivers for characterizing the flight path of 
remotely piloted vehicles.  
- Low cost, stable (< 1 percent over several months) portable radiometric 
sources for field characterization of spectral radiometers.  
- Innovative approaches for the gathering, storing, and forwarding of in situ 
measurements using common carrier infrastructures.  
- Lightning location techniques to locate VLF sferic sources (5 to 15 kHz) 
within 100 km at ranges of 2000 km or more.  
- Systems for in situ measurements of atmospheric electrical parameters 
including electric and magnetic fields, conductivity, and optical emissions.  
- Wide-band microwave radiometer capable of high-speed characterization of 
cloud parameters, including liquid and ice phase precipitation, that can operate 
in harsh environmental conditions (e.g., on-board ships).  
- Autonomous GPS-located air borne sensors that remotely sense atmospheric 
wind profiles in the troposphere and lower stratosphere with high spatial 
resolution and accuracy.  
- Mass spectrometer time-of-flight system with: 1) a total weight of less than 1 
kg, 2) a large dynamic range of at least 1E8, 3) a mass range of 1 to 2000 amu 
with unit resolution throughout the entire range, and 4) innovative ionization 
techniques that will improve the sensitivity by an order of magnitude over 
current mass spectrometer ion sources.  
- Miniaturized valve that is: 1) latching, 2) bakeable to 300 C, 3) case leak 
and seat leak rate less than 1E-10 atm.cc/sec, 4) less than 5 grams and less 
than 20 mm long x 13 mm diameter.  
- Advanced aerosol instrumentation to provide quantitative chemical composition, 
fast response time, robust calibration methodologies, and reliable inlet 
geometries for particle sampling.  
- Self-diagnosis techniques that provide a continuous measure of data 
quality and instrument health.  Real-time adjustments in sensor operation to 
compensate for instrument degradation or changes in sensed properties.  
- Measurement of seismic, electromagnetic, magnetic and gravity fields and 
properties for the prediction and mitigation of natural hazards (e.g., 
earthquakes, landslides, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis).

13.03 Special Event Imaging and Other Earth Observing Instruments 
Lead Center: MSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Proposals are sought for the development of innovative technology for the 
observation of short-lived phenomena in the Earth's atmosphere, oceans, and 
land.  These innovations will make important contributions to the Earth Science 
Enterprise (ESE) science and application themes.  Areas of interest include, but 
are not limited to, phenomena such as severe weather, thunderstorms, lightning, 
volcanoes, wildfires, flash floods, and ocean blooms.  These innovations are 
intended to increase our understanding of the effects of short term forcing on 
the interacting physical, chemical and biological processes that effect the 
environment in which we live.  In addition, it is anticipated that proposed 
innovations should directly contribute to the ESE goal of predicting and 
mitigating natural hazards.
 
Atmospheric measurements of interest include meteorological parameters that play 
important roles in short lived phenomena including clouds, precipitation, 
lightning, cloud ice, water vapor, aerosols, winds, temperature and chemical 
constituents and effluents.  

Surface measurements include temperatures of ocean and land, ocean productivity 
and color, terrain mapping and changes, vegetation index and biological 
productivity.  

Sought after technological advances include techniques that lead to improved 
temporal, spatial and spectral response to the above-described geophysical 
phenomena.  These advances may be at the component, subsystem, and complete 
system level and should address reduced size, weight or power, improved 
reliability and lower cost in addition to the requirements for improved 
performance.  These innovations should expand the capabilities of airborne 
systems (manned and unmanned) and the next generation spaceborne systems.  
Innovative approaches are an important element of competitive proposals under 
this solicitation.  Specific sensor needs include: 

- Storm/cloud sensing technology used to obtain a proxy to the instantaneous 
internal convective strength of storms and its relationship to latent heat 
release and transport.  
- Lightning sensing technology to measure total flash distribution, frequency 
and intensity, and provide flash type discrimination (e.g., intracloud versus 
cloud-to-ground lightning).  
- Technology to aid in the mitigation of wildfires, either by early detection or 
through the measurement of phenomena that contribute to or initiate fires.  
- Agile optical sensors with high temporal, spectral and spatial resolution 
capabilities.  
- Active and passive microwave instrumentation to provide rapid interrogation of 
targets of opportunity.  
- Onboard data processing capabilities to process large volumes of data in 
need real-time.  Requirements include event detection and discrimination, 
background suppression, data compression, atmospheric correction and 
geolocation and geometric correction.  

Component requirements include:

- Large CCD arrays (e.g., 4000 x 4000 pixels) with high frame rate capability 
(e.g., 1000 frames per second) and large well depth (e.g., > 1.5 million 
electrons).  
- Stable, large area (e.g., 15 cm dia.), narrow-band (e.g., 1 nanometer) 
interference filters.
- Wavelength programmable filters.
- Broad-band microwave transmitters and receivers.  
- Fast (e.g., F/1), compact optics.  

13.04 Active Microwave 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): none 

Radar has proven to be an ideal instrument for many Earth science applications.  
Examples include global freeze/thaw monitoring and soil moisture mapping, 
accurate global wind retrieval and snow inundation mapping, global 3-D mapping 
of rainfall and cloud systems, precise topographic mapping and natural hazard 
monitoring, global ocean topographic mapping and glacial ice mapping for climate 
change studies.  

For global coverage and the long-term study of Earth's eco-systems, space-based 
radar is of particular interest to Earth scientists.  Radar instruments for 
Earth science measurements include Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), 
scatterometer, sounder, altimeter and atmospheric radar.  The life-cycle cost of 
such radar missions has always been driven by the resources - power, mass, size, 
and data rate - required by the radar instrument, often making radar not cost 
competitive with other remote sensing instruments.  Order-of-magnitude 
advancement in key radar components will make the radar instrument more power 
efficient, much lighter weight and smaller in stow volume, leading to 
substantial savings in overall mission life-cycle cost by requiring smaller and 
less expensive spacecraft buses and launch vehicles.  On-board processing 
techniques will reduce data rates sufficiently to enable global coverage.  High 
performance yet affordable radars will provide data products of better quality 
and deliver them to the users more timely and frequently, with benefits for 
science, as well as civil and defense communities.  

Technologies which may lead to advances in radar instrument design, 
architectures, hardware, and algorithms are the focused areas of this subtopic.  
In order to increase the radar remote sensing user community, this subtopic will 
also consider radar data applications and post processing techniques.  

The frequency and bandwidth of operation are mission driven and defined by the 
science objectives.  For SAR applications, the frequencies of interest include 
L-band (1.25 GHz), C-band (5.30 GHz), and X-band (9.6 GHz).  The required 
bandwidth varies from 20 MHz to 300 MHz to achieve the desired resolution.  The 
application of the synthetic aperture technique is also applied to other radars, 
including radar ice sounding and wide swath ocean altimeters.  The sounder is a 
low frequency radar (< 100 MHz) with a very high percentage bandwidth (100 
percent).  Ocean altimeters typically operate at C-band (5.3 GHz) and Ku-band 
(12 GHz).  The atmospheric radars operate at very high frequencies (35 GHz and 
94 GHz) with only modest bandwidth requirements on the order of a few MHz.  

The emphasis of this subtopic is on core technologies that will significantly 
reduce mission cost and increase performance and utility of future radar 
systems.  Specific areas in which advances are needed include: 

Synthetic Aperture Radar 
- Lightweight, electronically steerable, dual-polarized, phased-array antennas 
and beam-formation networks.  
- Shared aperture, multi-frequency antennas.  
- Lightweight deployable antenna structures and deployment mechanisms.  
- High-efficiency, high power, low cost, lightweight, phase-stable 
transmit/receive modules.  
- Advanced transmit/receive module architectures such as optically fed T/R 
modules or signal up/down conversion within the module.  
- Advanced radar system architectures including flexible, broadband signal 
generation, direct digital conversion radar systems, and autonomous radar 
control concepts.  
- Innovative radar system concepts to achieve wide swath (> 250 km) to enable 
frequent site revisit and ultra-low cost radars to enable constellations for 
global coverage.  
- Advanced radar component technologies including high-power low-loss RF 
switches, filters and phase shifters (MEMS devices are of particular interest); 
thin-film membrane compatible (flexible) electronics; high-efficiency power 
converters; high-speed analog-to-digital converters; low-sidelobe chirp 
waveform generator and optical chirp generator.  
- Digital beamforming and on-board processing technology.  
- SAR data processing algorithms and data reduction techniques.  
- SAR data applications and post-processing techniques.  

Radar Ice-Sounder 
- Synthetic aperture processing technique to increase resolution.  
- Lightweight broad-band (100 percent or more) low frequency (< 100 MHz), 
high gain (> 10 dB) deployable antennas.  
- Highly efficient, broadband, low frequency (< 100 MHz) transmitter.  
- Low-power, highly integrated radar components.  
- Ionospheric correction, data processing algorithms and data reduction 
techniques.  
- Data applications and post-processing techniques.  

Atmospheric Radar 
- Low sidelobe, electronically steerable millimeter wave phased-array 
antennas and feed networks.  
- Low sidelobe, shared aperture, multi-frequency millimeter wave antennas.  
- Large, lightweight, low sidelobe, millimeter wave antenna reflectors and 
reflectarrays.  
- Lightweight deployable antenna structures and deployment mechanisms.  
- High power Ka-band and W-band transmitters (10 Kwatt).  
- High-efficiency, low cost, lightweight Ka-band and W-band transmit/receive 
modules.  
- Advanced transmit/receive module concepts such as optically fed T/R modules.  
- Advanced data processing techniques for real-time rain cell tracking, and 
rapid 3-D rain mapping.  

Wide Swath Ocean & Surface Water Monitoring Altimeters 
- Shared aperture, multi-frequency antennas.  
- Large, lightweight antenna reflectors and reflectarrays.  
- Lightweight deployable antenna structures and deployment mechanisms.  
- High efficiency, high power, phase stable C-band and Ku-band transmitters 
- Calibration techniques, data processing algorithms and data reduction 
techniques.  
- Data applications and post-processing techniques.  

Polarimetric Ocean/Land Scatterometer 
- Shared aperture, multi-frequency antennas.  
- Large, lightweight, electronically steerable, dual polarization, 
reflectarrays.  
- Lightweight deployable antenna structures and deployment mechanisms.  
- High efficiency, high power, phase stable C-band and Ku-band transmitters.  
- Low-power, highly integrated radar components.  
- Calibration techniques, data processing algorithms and data reduction 
techniques.  
- Data applications and post-processing techniques.  

13.05 Passive Microwave 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Proposals are sought for the development of innovative technology for measuring 
the Earth's atmosphere and surface using passive microwave techniques.  The 
innovations are intended to increase our understanding of the interacting 
physical, chemical and biological processes that form the complex Earth system.
 
Atmospheric measurements of interest include climate and meteorological 
parameters, such as temperature, aerosols, clouds, water vapor, precipitation 
and chemical constituents such as ozone, nitrogen dioxide, nitric oxide, and 
carbon monoxide.  

Surface measurements of interest include multispectral imaging, temperatures of 
water, land and ice, and snow coverage.  Technology innovations may include 
components, subsystems, and complete systems and should address reduced size, 
weight or power, improved reliability and lower cost.  

The innovations should expand the capabilities of airborne systems (manned and 
unmanned) and the next generation spaceborne systems.  Innovative approaches are 
an important element of competitive proposals under this solicitation.  Specific 
needs include: 

- Examples of instruments include imaging radiometers, receivers on a chip, and 
flux radiometers for microwave wavelengths (1 - 500 GHz).  Innovative 
measurement concepts or advances leading to smaller, lower power, and lower cost 
instruments will be considered.  
- Onboard data processing capabilities to perform the following in near real-
time: 1) Reconfigurable computing of image and sounder data to enhance research 
flexibility and enable high compression ratios, 2) atmospheric correction, and 
3) geolocation and geometric correction of digital image data.  
- Techniques for the detection and removal of Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) 
in microwave radiometers are desired.  Microwave radiometer measurements can be 
contaminated by RFI if a source with sufficient strength is radiating within or 
near the reception band of the radiometer.  Electronic subsystems that can be 
incorporated into microwave radiometers to detect and suppress RFI will insure 
higher data quality.  
- New technology calibration reference sources for microwave radiometers that 
provide greatly improved reference measurement accuracy.  High emissivity (near 
block-body) surfaces are being used as on-board calibration targets for 
microwave radiometers, either airborne or spaceborne.  NASA is seeking new 
designs using noise-diode or other electronic devices as additional reference 
sources for on-board calibration.  NASA is also seeking ways to significantly 
reduce the weight of aluminum core target designs.  Innovative designs using 
noise-diode or other electronic devices as additional reference sources for on-
board calibration are desired.  Of particular interest are variable correlated 
noise sources for calibrating correlation-type receivers used in aperture 
synthesis and polarimetric radiometers.  
- New approaches are sought for microwave radiometer system calibration that 
provide end to end calibration including corrections for temperature changes and 
other potential sources of instrumental measurement drift and error.  
- NASA is developing satellite systems that will use L-band microwave emission 
from the surface to measure soil moisture to a depth of ~ 10 cm.  A ground based 
network of sensors capable of measuring areas at least 100,000 km2 with spatial 
resolution of 20 km will be needed to validate those space-borne measurements.  
Measurement of ground-wave propagation characteristics of radio signals from 
commercial sources may satisfy that need.  Although absolute values of soil 
moisture are desirable, they are not required if the technique can be calibrated 
frequently at suitable sites.  Cost per covered area, autonomous operation, 
anticipated accuracy and depth resolution of the soil moisture measurement will 
be considerations for selection.  
- Focal plane array modules for large-aperture passive microwave imaging 
applications.  
- High power (> 5 mW) signal sources and low noise (< 2500 K) heterodyne 
receivers for operation in the range between 500 GHz and 3 THz.  
- Computer aided design software for 3 dimensional layout and performance 
evaluation of quasi-optical components and systems.  
- Multi-GHz.  Low power, 4-bit undersampling analog-to-digital converters and 
associated digital signal processing logic circuits.  

13.06 Active Optical 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): GSFC, MSFC 

Innovative developments are needed in lidar technology for the remote 
measurement of atmospheric aerosols, clouds, molecular species (ozone, water 
vapor, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide), 
meteorological parameters (density, pressure, temperature, and wind profiles), 
planetary surface topography, vegetation, and sub-surface ocean layers; for 
ground-based lidar systems and laser ranging systems that measure atmospheric 
backscatter, vegetation structure and composition, and pulse time-of-flight to 
laser transponders or reflectors on satellites.  Specifically, technologies for 
expanding the measurement capabilities of current airborne lidar systems and for 
the next generation of spaceborne and Unmanned Aeronautical Vehicle (UAV) lidar 
systems are sought.  Technology innovations may include lidar components, 
subsystems, and complete systems and may address reduced weight or power or 
increased energy efficiency, reliability, or autonomous operation.  

Atmospheric Constituent Measurements 
- Solid-state laser technology for tunable and/or fixed frequency, high-energy 
(> 500 mJ at more than 10 Hz) pulsed lasers for spaceborne applications.  This 
includes solid-state laser materials compatible with diode pumping and high 
efficiency (> 2.5 percent wallplug) and new or improved optical materials for 
high efficiency frequency conversion.  Of prime interest are long-lifetime, low 
weight and volume materials and technologies applicable to highly efficient, 
conductively cooled lasers operating in the 0.28-0.36, 0.47-0.54, 0.7-1.1, and 
1.5-2.8 micron regions; also interested in the 3.2-4.7 micron region.  Also 
needed are single-mode, line-narrowed, compact sources for injection seeding in 
the 0.28-0.36, 0.7-1.1 and 1.5-2.1 micron regions and high reliability, high 
efficiency, high brightness, conductively cooled diode arrays operating in 
wavelength regions for pumping solid-state lasers.  
- Lidar receiver technology for large (> 3m^2), lightweight collection apertures 
having multiple-wavelength operation from UV to near IR is needed.  Inherent 
spectral selection/dispersion and high peak transmission (50-80 percent), 
electromagnetically tuned, narrow bandwidth (10-100 picometers) filtering is 
desirable.  Small- and large-angle scanning (up to 3 degrees and 30-60 degrees 
off nadir, respectively) of 0.5 meter and 1.0 meter lidar systems is needed for 
space.  Low mass and few to no moving parts.  
- Signal detection and processing subsystems with quick recovery (less than 3 
microseconds) from saturation and high-speed, high-quantum efficiency (30-80 
percent) detectors with low-noise and good linearity are needed for lidar 
operation over large dynamic ranges.  
- For UAV applications, compact, high repetition rate, narrow linewidth laser 
transmitter systems are needed that produce energies from micro- to milliJoules 
per pulse.  Laser energies of more than 100 mJ at 30-1000 Hz in the UV and more 
than 200 mJ at 10-20 Hz in the 355, 936, 944, and 1064 nm region are needed.  
- High CW power (> 500 mW-1 W) single spatial mode laser diodes, based on 
simplistic structures such as the Fabry-Perot cavity, for core-pumping of fiber 
lasers.  Wavelength regions mainly include 800-810 nm, but also of interest are 
780-785 nm, and 980 nm.  
- Single-element and array detectors, combined with preamplifier circuitry in a 
single integrated circuit, for lidar detection at 355nm, 532nm, and 1064nm 
having several gigahertz bandwidth, high quantum efficiencies, good linearity, 
and minimum cooling requirements.  
- Optical phased array scanning concepts for programmable beam pointing with 
high transmission (> 90 percent) and angular deflection capability > 20 degrees.  
Aperture diameters from 2 cm to 1 m are of interest and preservation of beam 
quality is a primary requirement.  
- Large aperture, ultra light, scanning lidar receivers with high efficiency, 
narrow field-of-view, and narrowband filtering.  
- Scanning lidar transceivers that use aperture sharing and are capable of 
producing multiple look angles, each with a small field-of-view.  

Coherent Wind Measurements in the 1.5-2.5 Micrometer Wavelength Range 
- Low mass, compact optics for deflecting a circularly polarized laser beam for 
a conical scan.  Diameters of 5 cm to 1 m with an immediate need of up to 50 cm.  
Preservation of laser beam quality is required.  
- Low mass, 1-m class beam expanding telescope technology with low fabrication 
cost and long-lived performance in space environment.  
- Technology for autonomous operation and alignment maintenance of coherent 
lidar systems; such as a low-mass, low-power, low-voltage optical element 
capable of correcting piston, defocus, astigmatism, coma, and spherical 
aberrations.  
- Integrated opto-electronic receiver combining photodetectors, local oscillator 
laser, beam conditioning and combining, and signal processing components.  
- Fast (few tens of microseconds) lag-angle compensation optics technology for 
precise, reliable steering of the optical axis of a space-based Doppler lidar.  
- Single-element and array detectors having high bandwidth, high quantum 
efficiencies in the 1.5-2.5 micron wavelength band.  Bandwidths up to 6 GHz are 
desired.  
- Pulsed, eye safe laser technology having technical path leading to 
simultaneous characteristics of > 2J energy, > 12 Hz PRF, < 500 W laser power 
requirement when pulsing, < 2 microsecond duration, < 1 m/s equivalent pulse 
spectrum, < 1.3 M^2 beam quality, intermittent operation with periods of 1-10 
minutes and duty cycle around 20 percent and minimum "off" power draw and 
minimum time to restabilize, and which shows potential for 7-year lifetime in 
space environment.  
- Diode-laser arrays operating near 0.79 micrometers having pulse lengths > 1.0 
ms, energy densities > 1.3 J/cm^2, duty cycle > 0.20 and narrow beam divergence.  
- High efficiency methods for concentrating the emissions from nominal 1.0 cm 
square arrays to 4.0 mm diameter spot sizes.  
- Tunable single-mode semiconductor lasers or other compact, single frequency 
sources for use as injection seeders and/or local oscillators, with linewidths 
0.1-0.2 MHz operating in the 1.8-2.2 micron and 3.0-3.5 micron regions.  

Surface Topography and Oceanic Measurements 
- Compact, conductively-cooled near-infrared laser transmitters with less than 1 
nsec pulses, single spatial mode, several millijoule performance at multi-
kilohertz pulse rates.  
- Oceanic LIDAR systems or components in the 480-685 nm wavelength region for 
remote sensing of sub-surface ocean layers and fluorescence.  
- Quadrant Geiger-mode avalanche, photo diodes or comparable microchannel plate 
photomultipliers with a quantum efficiency approaching 40 percent @ 532 nm, less 
than or equal to 400 psec risetime, and submicrosecond gating at 2 kHz rates.  
- Silicon avalanche photo diodes, photodiode arrays, and photon counting 
detectors with quantum efficiency greater than 35 percent at 1064 nm wavelength; 
and high efficiency, high speed, & low noise detectors for the 1500 to 2200 nm 
wavelength region.  
- Signal detection and processing subsystems with quick recovery (less than 30 
microsec) from saturation and high-speed, high-quantum efficiency (30-80 ercent) 
detectors with low-noise and good linearity are needed for lidar operation over 
large dynamic ranges.  

Direct Detection and Other Measurements 
- Laser techniques and component technology for measurement of the wind field 
and wind shear using direct-detection methods, with high accuracy and high range 
resolution.  Eye safety is a consideration.  
- High spectral resolution filters with high throughput, out of band spectral 
blocking, frequency tunable, and frequency stabilization for direct-detection 
measurements of winds at 355 nm (1 GHz bandwidth) and 1064 nm (100 MHz 
bandwidth).  
- Compact, power efficient, frequency reference with better than 1 part in 10^14 
stability and accuracy; that is suitable for interplanetary missions.  
- Adaptive photon-counting correlation range receivers capable of extracting 
satellite range data with high time resolution (better than 20 psec) during 
daylight operations.  
- High detectivity, spectrally diverse receivers including narrowband notch 
filters, high transmission narrow bandpass optical filters, & multi-channel 
array detection.  

13.07 Passive Optical 
Lead Center: ARC  
Participating Center(s): JPL 

Proposals are sought for the development of innovative technology for measuring 
the atmosphere and Earth surface using passive optical techniques.  The 
innovations are intended to increase our understanding of the interacting 
physical, chemical and biological processes that form the complex Earth system.  

Atmospheric measurements of interest include climate and meteorological 
parameters, such as temperature, amounts of aerosols, clouds, water vapor, 
carbon dioxide and methane; and, chemical constituents such as ozone, nitrogen 
dioxide, nitric oxide, carbon monoxide, and hydrocarbons.  Surface measurements 
of interest include vegetation index, multispectral imaging, bi-directional 
reflectance, biological productivity, surface terrain mapping, temperatures of 
water, land and ice, ocean productivity and ocean color.  Technology innovations 
may include components, subsystems, and complete systems and should address 
reduced size, weight or power, improved reliability and lower cost.  The 
wavelengths of interest include IR, visible and ultraviolet bands.  The 
innovations should expand the capabilities of airborne systems (manned and 
unmanned) and the next generation spaceborne systems.  Innovative approaches are 
an important element of competitive proposals under this solicitation.  Specific 
needs include: 

System Architectures 
- Innovative instrument architectures that provide flexibility in system 
configuration to address specific measurement requirements.  For example, 
sampling flexibility in either the spectral or spatial domain of an imaging 
spectrometer focal plane array will provide the ability to trade between 
spectral and spatial resolution in the context of a specific scientific problem 
as constrained by limited downlink bandwidth.  
- Innovative instrument architectures that expand scientific knowledge and 
provide significant reductions in the end-to-end implementation.  This includes 
designs and component technologies relating to improved sensors for observations 
Earth's surface and atmosphere.  Examples of instruments include multispectral 
imaging radiometers and flux radiometers for wavelengths from the UV to 
microwave.  Innovative measurement concepts or advances leading to smaller and 
lower cost instruments will be considered.  Technical approaches should include 
application of uncooled infrared detectors, non-mechanical choppers, calibration 
methods and tuned filters.  
- High throughput compact systems (f/1-f/2).  
- Wide field of view spectrometer systems (e.g., with expandable architectures) 
with no moving parts.  
- Systems with inherent environmental stability.  

Component Technologies 
- Optical technologies that will enable high spatial resolution (< 10 meter) 
measurements along track for spacecraft sensors in low earth orbit.  ombinations 
of high light collection efficiency and instrument throughput, and fast, low 
noise detector readout are required to provide adequate signal power (SNR > 500) 
to address multi- and hyper-spectral measurement requirements.  
- Wedge filters suitable for space application and capable of spectral 
resolutions of a few nanometers over the visible through short-wave IR portions 
of the spectrum, and angular (IFOV) resolutions on the order of a milliradian.  
- 4 K x 4 K and larger detector arrays sensitive in near UV (300-400 nm) and 
Near IR (1-3 micron) with large (> 1 million electrons) well depth.  
- Ultra-stable spectral calibration techniques for data quality management and 
the evaluation of long-term sensor degradation trends in space instruments.  
- On-board near real-time processing for atmospheric correction, geolocation, 
and geometric correction of digital image data.  
- Optical imager technologies that will enable lightweight, low cost large 
aperture optical systems optics for a variety of land, ocean, and atmospheric 
observations through the elimination of conventional telescopes and focal planes 
in space based imagers.  For example, phased arrays or multispectral imagers 
based on holographic and/or diffractive optics.  Instruments should have 
performance specifications comparable to or better than current imagers such as 
MODIS aboard NASA's Terra satellite.  
- Fast, 1-meter diameter lightweight telescope for space application with 
minimal distortion in the 0.3- 3-micron wavelength range.  
- Ultra-stable remote sensor calibration techniques for long term trend 
determination in space instruments.  
- Development of innovative techniques and component technologies for measuring 
polarization of light scattered from the atmosphere.  
- Advanced gratings on flat or curved surfaces that maximize efficiency and 
minimize scatter and ghosts.  
- Linear variable filters with extended range, seamlessly stitched filter 
strips.  
- Broadband antireflection methods that can be applied to the photodetector 
array, in the visible and infrared.  
- Novel or improved high-resolution dispersive elements.  
- Environmentally robust, electronically variable filters with extended spectral 
range.  

Innovative Optomechanical Designs 
- Development of systems capable of off-nadir pointing for the acquisition of 
multi-angle data, the acquisition of stereo pairs, the frequent imaging of 
rapidly changing events from orbit scanning and tilting to remove sun 
reflection off the ocean, and the frequent imaging of rapidly changing events 
from orbit.  Very low mass, power and high speed and flexibility are desired.  
- Compact, lightweight optical designs that utilize a minimum number of optical 
surfaces.  
- Non-classical designs utilizing guided wave optics.  
- Self-aligning systems or methods of assembly.  

14 Platform Technologies for Earth Science Measurements 

NASA is fostering innovations that support implementation of the Earth Science 
(ES) program, an integrated international enterprise to study the Earth system.  
ES uses the unique perspective available from orbit to study land cover and land 
use changes, short and long term climate variability, natural hazards, and 
environmental changes.  Additionally, ES uses terrestrial and airborne 
measurements to complement those acquired from Earth orbit.  ES has a parallel 
development effort to these platforms which include the largest ground and data 
system ever undertaken which will provide the facility for command and control 
of flight segments and for data processing, distribution, storage, and archival 
of vast amounts of Earth science research data.  The Earth Science Program 
defines Platforms as the host systems for Earth Science Instruments.  That is, 
they provide the infrastructure for an instrument or suite of instruments.  
Traditionally, the term platform would be synonymous with spacecraft, and it 
certainly does include spacecraft.  However, platform is intended to be much 
broader in application than spacecraft and is intended to include nontraditional 
hosts for sensors and instruments such as airborne platforms (piloted and 
unpiloted aircraft, balloons, drop sondes), terrestrial platforms, sea surface 
and subsurface platforms, and even surface penetrators.  These application 
examples are given to illustrate the wide diversity of possibilities for 
acquiring Earth Science data consistent with the future vision of the Earth 
Science Program and indicate types of platforms for which technology development 
is required.  

14.01 Power Management and Distribution 
Lead Center: GRC  
Participating Center(s): GSFC 

Future Earth Science missions will be characterized by extended duration 
missions, operation in various orbits, constellations of spacecraft, and real-
time networking of space, airborne, and in situ platforms.  This subtopic seeks 
technologies that will significantly reduce development and operations costs, 
increase mission capabilities and enable revolutionary concepts such as virtual 
spacecraft constellations, or unconventional platforms such as long-duration 
UAVs and piloted vehicles, balloons, buoys, or even utilization of the Moon as 
an observation platform.  

Areas of special interest in power management and distribution (PMAD) include 
autonomous operations, advanced power-conditioning devices that help reduce size 
and mass, microelectronic devices, and improved wiring system designs.  In 
addition, technologies of interest include very high efficiency, flexible and 
light-weight photovoltaics, advanced batteries (such as Nickel Metal Hydride), 
lightweight/high efficiency regenerative fuel cells, and multi-purpose flywheel 
systems that combine the functions of attitude control and energy storage.  
Advanced materials, surfaces, and components for space power systems that are 
durable under different space environment conditions are also of interest.  

Innovative concepts utilizing advanced technology are needed to manage and 
distribute power in lighter, smaller, cheaper, more durable, and high 
performance spacecraft and unconventional platforms, and to improve reliability 
and reduce overall costs (including development and operations).  Advances for 
power management and distribution (PMAD) systems are sought in the following 
areas:

- Management, control and monitoring of power systems, adjustable speed drives, 
or autonomous operation of space power systems.  
- Advanced power-conditioning devices for housekeeping and control of a wide 
range of regulated voltages on Earth Science payloads to reduce size and mass 
utilizing hybrid, multi-chip, and other techniques.  
- Improved wiring system designs, new fault detection techniques, and advanced 
circuit protection to improve safety, reliability, and performance of aerospace 
systems.  

Innovative concepts for systems and components are solicited in the areas of 
photovoltaics and lightweight, high-efficiency regenerative fuel cell systems.  

NASA missions also require systems having high energy density and cycle life.  
This includes advanced batteries, regenerative fuel cells for energy storage, 
and competing alternatives with high-power-density such as lightweight 
flywheels.  Power levels of interest range from tens of milliwatts to several 
kilowatts.  Specific areas of interest are: 

- Large applications of photovoltaic technology with targeted cell efficiencies 
over 30 percent, array performance up to 1000 watts per kilogram and 400 watts 
per square meter and lifetimes of 15 to 20 years.  
- Nickel-hydrogen and nickel metal hydride battery technology capable of more 
than 30,000 cycles, at least 100 watt-hours per kilogram, and 10-year life in 
LEO at greater than 40 percent DOD, and 20 year life in GEO at greater than 70 
percent DOD for spacecraft and space systems.  
- Demonstrations of multi-purpose flywheel systems that combine attitude control 
and energy storage functions.  
- Materials, surfaces, and components that are durable for atomic oxygen.  

14.02 Advanced Communication Technologies for Near-Earth Missions 
Lead Center: GRC  
Participating Center(s): JPL 

To realize the Earth Science Enterprise vision of Sensor-Web, a host of in-space 
and terrestrial communication link technologies are required.  These 
technologies are likely to perform in an internet-based multi-point to multi-
point communication architecture.  Furthermore, in this architecture the 
spacecraft a well as the ground systems will be fully capable of interfacing to 
commercial communication networks to transport data directly to the users.  

Innovations are sought in space communications technologies for data delivery 
from NASA's future Earth science enterprise near-earth spacecraft, 
constellations and platforms directly to users.  Advanced techniques and 
products are solicited that support communication among NASA spacecraft and 
commercial GEO networks for data delivery to users in cost-effective manner.  In 
addition, ever increasing demands are being placed on missions conserving 
bandwidth and power resources, while driving up the demands for data 
transmission and access.  Innovative communications technologies are sought at 
the device, subsystem and system level in such areas as microwave, millimeter 
wave and optical communications; digital processing, modulation and coding; 
communications architectures and network technologies.  

Specifically, the required products are described below, but are not limited to 
the following: 

- High rate data communication microwave or optical system technologies for 
supporting multi-Gigabit/sec data rates from spacecraft to ground networks.  
- Direct data distribution communication architectures (including multicasting) 
from LEO spacecraft directly to several users at various data rates and 
associated communication subsystems.  Small, highly efficient, integrated 
communication receivers and transmitters for interspacecraft communications for 
spacecraft constellations are needed.  
- Inter satellite communication link technologies to transfer sensor data 
from LEO or MEO orbiting spacecraft to GEO spacecraft; 
- Communication link technologies to transfer data from an Earth observing 
balloon or airplane, where the collection and transmission of data is by 
Internet protocols.  
- In the component area, innovative approaches are required to enable higher 
frequency, miniature, power efficient Traveling Wave Tube Amplifiers (TWTAs) 
operating at millimeter wave frequencies.  Of particular interest is the 
development of TWTA's that can operate at communication bit rates of 10 Gbps or 
higher.  
- Low loss MEMS based RF switches are needed that would enable the development 
of reconfigurable antennas and filters for in flight control of the radiating 
frequency bandwidth and power.  
- RF component and sub system technologies are required that increase the level 
of integration above the current state of the art to enable "system on a chip" 
type communication systems.  Low cost, Ka band flat plate array antennas; 2 watt 
Ka-band MMIC power amplifiers and low noise block down-converters are desired 
for small earth terminals applications.  Low cost, precision tracking Ka-band 
earth terminals for high data rate (OC-3 to OC-12) direct-to-earth downlinks 
from LEO/MEO spacecraft are also of interest.  Wide scan angle (+/-60 degrees), 
low profile, transmit/receive Ka-band antennas; Ku-Ka band transcievers and 
closed loop acquisition/tracking algorithms for low-orbit space platforms and 
communication satellites are desired.  
- Power and bandwidth efficient modems, combined modulation and coding schemes, 
multiple access and other digital transmission techniques for application in 
Earth science enterprise communication links, space- or ground-based are sought.  
- Novel approaches are needed to reduce size, mass, power and cost of spacecraft 
digital components to enable multi-Gigabit/sec throughputs.  
- Another technology that would enable the next generation of satellites is the 
development of analog to digital and digital to analog (A/D and D/A) converters 
operating at 10-20 Gbps.  High speed, internet protocol (IP) based digital 
transceivers and network processing and interface modules for controlling 
onboard LAN's, including routing, encoding, encrypting of data to allow services 
on demand to address the need for autonomous spacecraft operations are sought.
- For optical communications, highly efficient laser transmitters, modulation 
and demodulation schemes for near-earth (up to 10 Gbps diode and MOPA) sources 
(including WDM schemes) with greater than 1 W of average power are sought.  

14.03 Command and Data Handling 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Advancing science with reduced levels of mission funding, shorter mission 
development schedules and reduced availability of flight electronic components 
creates new requirements for spacecraft Command and Data Handling C&DH) systems.  
Specific areas for which proposals are being sought include: 

- Subsystem data transfer - communications between various spacecraft subsystems 
become increasingly important in order to realize higher autonomy.  Development 
of technologies and architectures that increase the rate of data transfer above 
20 Mbits/s are necessary to achieve the self-diagnosis, autonomous control, and 
science data transfer requirements.  
- Intra-system data transfer - communications within the spacecraft subsystem 
(between cards within a box) is currently a limiting factor in achieving higher 
overall data throughputs.  Development of technologies for communications within 
a box that would replace the conventional passive back plane are necessary to 
achieve higher science data throughput.  
- Volatile data storage - large capacity Solid State Recorders (SSRs) that are 
required to store instrument data until the next ground contact are currently 
weight and cost constrained.  Development of components and packaging techniques 
that would allow greater density and lower cost SSRs are necessary to support 
the higher science data rates higher data volumes and smaller spacecraft of the 
future.  
- General purpose data processing - higher levels of spacecraft autonomy require 
higher levels of general purpose CISC and RISC processing.  Development of 
spacecraft computers that match or exceed the commercially available desktop 
computers is essential to meeting the "lights out" spacecraft control 
requirements.  
- Special purpose data processing - higher levels of onboard science data 
processing such as histogramming, feature recognition and image registration are 
necessary to match the data gathering capabilities of future instruments with 
the limits of spacecraft to earth communications.  Development of technologies 
such as Digital Signal Processors (DSP) and related hardware is necessary to 
address this future need.  
- Reconfigurable computing hardware - achieving pure hardware processing 
capabilities with the flexibility of reprogammability would allow different 
science objectives to be met with the same hardware platform.  Development of 
technologies such as radiation hardened Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) 
and similar components for data communications and processing is necessary to 
achieve this goal.  
- Low-power electronics - in order to provide higher capabilities on smaller 
less expensive spacecraft, lower power consumption components is essential to 
reducing solar array and battery sizes, affecting the overall spacecraft design.  
Development of low voltage, such as 3.3V or 2.5V or lower technologies is 
essential to achieving the power constraints of smaller spacecraft.  

14.04 Guidance, Navigation and Control 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

The future Earth science architecture will include collaborating assets 
performing coordinated scientific observations.  These assets will include 
spacecraft but could also include balloons, aircraft (both piloted and 
unpiloted), and surface assets.  Advanced GN&C technology is required for each 
of these platforms that address low power, low mass, low maintenance, and 
reliabilty issues.  A vigorous effort is needed to develop guidance, navigation 
and control methodologies, algorithms, sensors and actuator technologies to 
enable revolutionary Earth science.  Exploiting new vantage points, developing 
new sensing strategies, and implementing system-wide techniques which promote 
agility, adaptability, evolvability, scalability, and affordability are 
characteristic of the technological challenges faced and representative of the 
significant leap beyond the current state of the art required.  Specific areas 
of research include: 

- Advanced sensors, actuators, and components with new or enhanced capabilities 
and performance, as well as reduced cost, mass, power, volume, and reduced 
complexity for all spacecraft GN&C system elements.  
Additional emphasis is placed on improved stability, accuracy, and lower noise 
angles.  
- Concepts for autonomous guidance of space transportation systems during 
atmospheric flight phases.  
- Control theory, filtering techniques, processing advances, software 
architectures, and improved environmental models for attitude and trajectory 
determination and prediction.  Filtering techniques and expert systems 
applications for near real-time trajectory determination and control.  Methods 
for in-flight attitude sensor alignment and transfer function calibration.  
- Rigid and flexible body control methods that are robust to parametric 
uncertainty and modeling error.  
- Innovative testbed development capabilities and computer aided engineering and 
design tools with parallel algorithms for analysis and development of GN&C 
systems.  
- Autonomous performance of ground system functions including attitude and 
trajectory determination, monitoring of spacecraft functions and environmental 
conditions, assessing ground system and spacecraft health status, ground system 
fault detection, orbital event and attitude dependent prediction support 
utilizing advanced techniques such as fuzzy logic and neural networks.  
Assessing spacecraft health status and optimizing performance through in-flight 
identification, fault detection stabilization, and re-configurable control.  
- Low power and mass propulsive attitude control actuators and related 
subsystem components.  Actuators to consume less than one watt of power at three 
volts, providing impulse bits on the order of one micro-N-sec for 3-axis control 
or 40 milli-N-sec for spin-stabilized control.  
- Innovations in GPS receiver hardware and algorithms that use GPS code and 
carrier signals to provide spacecraft navigation, attitude, and time: 
	- Combined navigation and attitude space receivers.  Advanced antenna 
designs.  
	- Navigation techniques that may employ WAAS corrections.  
	- Navigation, attitude, and control for spacecraft proximity operations.  
	- nnovative uses of GPS which enable new Earth science measurements; for 
example, the use of differential GPS in repeating aircraft flight patterns; and 
the use of ocean-reflected GPS signals.  
- vanced GNC solutions for balloon-borne stratospheric science payloads, 
including sub-arcsecond pointing control, sub-arcsecond attitude knowledge 
determination and trajectory guidance.  

14.05 Structures and Materials 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Advanced materials and structures technologies are needed for future Earth 
Science platforms.  These include materials and multifunctional structures that 
enable significant weight reduction and that possess extended life in the 
space environment, novel structural concepts for deployment to allow packaging 
of large structures on small launch vehicles, and innovative materials and 
structures technologies to enable dynamically and thermally stable platforms.  
Specific topics of interest include: 

- High strength-to-weight carbon nanotube-based composite materials for 
application to thrust structure, high-strength booms, thin shells, and 
membranes.  
- Lightweight shielding, self-healing materials, and other countermeasures to 
protect spacecraft systems from harmful effects of space radiation, including 
materials development.  
- Ultra-lightweight large structural concepts such as deployable and/or 
inflatable booms, membranes, and apertures for radiometer and synthetic aperture 
radar missions.
- Concepts, components, and materials to enable large, lightweight, diffraction 
limited optical systems including membrane optics.  
- Dynamically stable structures utilizing integral vibration control and 
disturbance/payload isolation including spacecraft launch load isolation 
systems.  
- Multifunctional structures with flexible electronics.  
- Thermally stable materials and components and integrated thermal/structural 
concepts for high efficiency passive thermal management.  
- Low cost, high power-to-weight efficiency deployable/inflatable solar 
arrays.  
- Technologies for mitigating the effects of meteoroids on critical platform 
components applicable to near-Earth missions.  
- Methods for predicting and controlling contamination resulting from the 
deployment and outgassing of large platforms.  
- Unpiloted Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) lightweight structures concepts.  
- UAV material systems which enable multiple year continuous mission operations.  

15 Advanced Information Systems Technology 

The Earth Science Enterprise acquires, processes and delivers very large 
(gigabyte to terabyte) volumes of remote sensing and related data to public and 
government entities that apply this information to understand and solve 
problems in Earth Science.  Information technology is currently employed 
throughout ESE's space and ground systems and the Advanced Information System 
Technology theme is soliciting technologies that apply to the end-to-end system 
functions.  The information system functions found in ESE include, but not 
limited to, data acquisition, data transmission, data processing, data 
management & storage, data distribution, data/metadata/document search, browse 
and assess, data subsetting, generic analysis, and generic visualization.  
The ESE is interested in advanced information technology that can improve any of 
these functions in isolation or in combination, or is able to support 
alternative architectures that better address the scientific requirements.  

15.01 Data Transmission from Onboard Sensors to Users 
Lead Center: GRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Earth science missions are transitioning to higher data production by onboard 
sensors while also developing smaller sized payloads.  Innovations are sought 
that offer significant reductions in cost and enhanced performance of system 
technology while improving system reliability and the efficiency of transmission 
of these data from the sensors to the users.  Products are sought in the 
following areas: 

- Advanced data compression techniques and buffer management strategies for 
both on-board and transmitted data that will lead to an order of magnitude 
improvement in data compression.  The data compression techniques must be 
applicable to a wide variety of data, such as radar, infrared and optical 
sensors, and should be lossless so that all data that is desired to be 
transmitted can be analyzed.  Hardware needed to support these techniques 
will also be needed.  
- Innovative modulation techniques that provide high capacity bandwidth 
efficiency with low power requirements while still maintaining highly reliable 
communications for LEO and GEO platforms.  
- Network architectures are sought that optimize transmission between multiple 
spacecraft to ground, and that allow spacecraft to be addressed as nodes on the 
internet by researchers.  Technology is needed to allow transparent and seamless 
interoperability of the mission data with commercial terrestrial networks using 
common commercial protocols such as TCP/IP and ATM.  Technologies are sought 
that lead to space-qualified codec, local area network, routing and switching 
hardware and software.  
- Often times, verification of techniques and software can be performed using 
lower risk terrestrial-based test beds.  Test beds that are proposed along with 
the above technology development are also viewed as acceptable areas.  

15.02 Knowledge Discovery Data Fusion 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): none 

NASA's Earth Science Enterprise collects terabyte-scale datasets routinely 
during its missions, and charges the scientific community with extracting usable 
and scientifically relevant information from them.  These data sets may be 
images, multispectral images, time series, or field and particle event lists.  
They may also be engineering time series about spacecraft health collected from 
on-board sensors.  Emphasis has recently been placed on handling and analyzing 
in situ data from networks or sensorwebs.  In addition to the ongoing challenges 
entailed by handling, analyzing and mining very large data sets, NASA now needs 
a new framework for performing science data evaluation onboard spacecraft and 
from in situ sensor networks.  New onboard or in situ science capabilities will 
enable mission activities to be directed by scientists without the assistance of 
a ground sequencing team, and the constraints of communications links.  The 
science capabilities will be adaptive in nature, and must be efficient in 
transmission of the usable key data.  

This subtopic enlists help in developing a new generation of tools and 
algorithms for effective acquisition and analysis of data and image sets, 
appropriate for ground or onboard/in situ use.  Of special interest are: 1) the 
ability to deal quantitatively with uncertainty present in data, perhaps in a 
statistical framework; 2) development of flexible models through which 
observables are linked to quantities of scientific or engineering interest; 3) 
harnessing database technology for organizing the observed data, models, and 
inferred knowledge, perhaps in onboard or in situ archives; 4) fusion of 
multiple datasets for enhanced scientific return; and 5) system concepts for 
handling interactions between onboard science analysis and event detection 
capabilities and other functions of an autonomous spacecraft or sensor web.  One 
or more of these areas should be addressed by every proposal.  Specific ubtopics 
of interest include: 

- Automated classification of data.  
- Supervised and unsupervised learning methods.  
- Knowledge discovery techniques.  
- Image analysis and segmentation.  
- Statistical pattern recognition.  
- Time series feature extraction and analysis.  
- Trainable object recognition.  
- Automatic image registration and change detection.  
- Visualization and rendering techniques.  
- Spatiotemporal datamining.  
- Intelligent, goal-directed data acquisition and/or compression.  
- Science data analysis algorithms designed for scalable computing.  
- System concepts for onboard science.  
- Adaptive data acquisition techniques.  

15.03 Geospatial Data Analysis Processing and Visualization Technologies 
Lead Center: SSC  
Participating Center(s): ARC 

Proposals are sought for the development of advanced technologies to enhance 
human and machine interaction in support of scientific, commercial and 
educational application of remote sensing data.  An emphasis is on distributed 
and/or mobile teams in validation and verification exercises and for the 
commercialization of remote sensing data.  Focus areas are to provide tools for 
interpretation, visualization or analysis of remotely sensed data; and to 
provide qualitative and quantitative analysis tools and techniques for 
performance analysis of remotely sensed data.  Applications can support the 
commercial remote sensing industry and enhance the commercial or educational 
application of Earth science data.  Areas of specific interest include: 

- Visualization of multi-variate geospatial data including remotely sensed 
data from the following: 
   - Airborne and satellite platforms, vector data from public and private 
archives; 
   - Cartographic databases from public and private sources; 
   - Continuous surface data held as a raster data model; and 
   - 3-D data held in a true 3-D raster model.  
- Innovative approaches that contribute to the understanding of data through the 
display and visualization of some or all of the above data types including 
providing the linkages and user interface between the cartographic model and 
attribute databases.
- Design and implementation of a virtual reality CAVE for scientific data 
visualization that is at least 1/20 the cost of current CAVE implementations.  
- Software tools for mobile computing and efficient data collection and/or 
presentation.
- Innovative approaches for incorporation of GPS data into in situ data 
collection operations with dynamic links to spatial databases, including 
environmental models.
- Tools for enabling distributed scientific collaboration.  
- Data merge and fusion software for efficient production and real-time 
delivery of commercial digital products to teams and remote users.
- Innovative techniques to automate quality assurance processes for science 
data products.
- Innovative techniques for validation of imaging systems (i.e., thermal and 
LIDAR imaging systems).
- Software to develop commercial products from digital topography and 
vegetation canopy data obtained from airborne and space-based active optical 
sensors.
- Software to automate the rapid processing and distribution of sub-setting 
and presenting RS data over a network 
- Unique, innovative data reduction and rapid analysis methodologies and 
algorithms, particularly for hyperspectral data sets.
- Distribution and sharing of fused science data sets to correlate similar 
data sets from diverse spacecraft and aerial vehicles and provide unique, 
commercially useful information products.  

15.04 High Performance Computing and Networking 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

This subtopic focuses on innovations in efficient and effective techniques for 
processing large volumes of data into useful information.  Collaboration between 
Earth scientists and computer scientists required for these proposals to 
demonstrate useful results.  Areas of interest include:

- High performance processing.  
- Computing: Distributed computing, Reconfigurable computing, Parallel/cluster 
computing, Embedded computing, Optical computing.  
- Innovative node connection networks.  
- High performance/pervasive networks.  
- Techniques to enhance performance of wide-area networks supporting highly 
distributed data production, archive, and access functions.  
- High-speed processing architectures/systems; applications of distributed 
computing environments, especially "pervasive computing".  
- Efficient methods/algorithms/systems for warehousing scientific 
multispectral and hyperspectral data and/or instrument data for automatic and 
user-directed mining/monitoring of meaningful trends, parameters, fluctuations, 
etc.  to maximize scientific value of TB-sized data sets.  
- Facilitating portability across architectures.  
- Advanced Storage and archival techniques (e.g., 3D holographic memory, 
holographic storage).  
- Load balancing techniques.  
- Standards to simplify data providers' activities while facilitating data 
usage by a large user community.  
- Server side technologies supporting highly responsive user-centric access 
(e.g., handheld PDAs to large date centers).  

15.05 Data Presentation Management 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

This subtopic focuses on innovative approaches to locating, summarizing and 
presenting Earth science data in a highly distributed and networked environment.  
Collaboration between Earth scientists and computer scientists required for the 
proposals to demonstrate useful results.  Specific examples of topics of 
interest are: 

- Techniques for capturing and managing client profile information.  
- Tools to facilitate product quality assurance and metadata updates.  
- Data viewing and real-time data browse, including fast, general purpose 
rendering tools for scientific applications.  Viewing of multi-variate 
geospatial data including remotely sensed data.  
- Software approaches to capture/automate workflow management.  
- Object relational technologies specific for Earth sciences.  
- Automatic documentation of data production prioritization and scheduling.  
- Enterprise process methods including simulation, monitoring, reporting, 
coordination and analysis.  
- Meta-data discovery.  
- Automated and analytical verification.  
- Automatic metric collection and analysis.  
- Scalable data management.  
- Smart Objects Dumb Archives (SODA).  
- Storage, archival and retrieval standards.
- Technologies supporting management, storage, search and retrieval of very 
large, distributed, geo-spatial earth science data volumes.  

15.06 Automation and Planning 
Lead Center: ARC  
Participating Center(s): GSFC 

Focus is on technologies that make a spacecraft or system react to uncertainties 
in a robust fashion while achieving a set of high-level goals or tasks.  
Innovations in automation and autonomous systems to support the high level 
command collection, processing and efficient and effective techniques for 
processing large volumes of data into useful information.  Intelligent search of 
large, distributed data stores.  Intelligent data discovery and searching over 
heterogeneous data.  Collaboration between Earth scientists and computer 
scientists is encouraged for these proposals to demonstrate useful results.  
Areas of interest include: 

- Autonomous agents: Intelligent autonomous mobile search agents to support 
science applications involving data available on the internet. 
- Autonomous data collection: Automatic dynamic reconfiguration of UAV or 
space on-board data gathering instruments to make effective use of observing 
conditions, baseline image data priority scheme, history of observations and 
limited on-board resources. 
- Planning and scheduling. 
- System health and maintenance (space and ground based). 
- Distributed decision making (multiple agents, autonomous systems). 
- Automated software testing. 
- Legacy code maintenance and conversion. 
- Automatic software generation (i.e., processing algorithms). 
- Software tools for parallelization; tools for production planning. 
- Control of FPGA to provide real-time products using hyper-spectral 
instrument data from airborne platforms. 
- Verification and validation of automated systems. 




8.4 SPACE SCIENCE

NASA's Space Science Enterprise seeks to discover the mysteries of the universe, 
explore the solar system, find planets around other stars, and search for life 
beyond Earth.  From Origins to Destiny, the Enterprise seeks to chart the 
evolution of the Universe, its galaxies, stars, planets, and life.  Its mission 
includes four science themes: Sun-Earth Connection - SEC (Space Physics); Solar 
System Exploration - SSE (Planetary Science); Structure and Evolution of the 
Universe - SEU (Astrophysics); and Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary 
Systems.  Each of these themes has a committee made up of both NASA and non-NASA 
scientists.  Among their activities is the creation of a scientific roadmap for 
the next 20 years -- a plan for future space missions that will probe the 
mysteries of the universe.  

http://spacescience.nasa.gov/



16 SUN EARTH CONNECTION	
16.01 Solar Remote Sensing	
16.02 Particles and Field Instruments	
16.03 Remote Sensing for Planetary Magnetosphere/Aeronomy and Outer Heliosphere 
Missions	
16.04 Spacecraft Technology for Nanosats	
16.05 Solar Sails	
17 STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION OF THE UNIVERSE	
17.01 Detectors and Sensors for Astrophysics	  
17.02 Astrophysical Observing Systems	
17.03 Gravitational, Submillimeter, UV and X-ray Interferometry	
17.04 Thermal Control and Cryogenic Systems	
17.05 Terrestrial and Extraterrestrial Balloons and Aerobots	
18 ASTRONOMICAL SEARCH FOR ORIGINS	
18.01 Large Telescope Systems	
18.02 Precision Constellations for Interferometry	
18.03 Astronomical Instrumentation	
18.04 Astrobiology	
19 EXPLORATION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM	
19.01 Lightweight Materials for Planetary Aerocapture and Balloons	
19.02 Instruments for Conducting In Situ Scientific Measurements	
19.03 Sample Access, Handling, and In Situ Investigation Systems	
19.04 Technologies for the Reduction of Biological Contamination on Flight 
Hardware	



16 Sun Earth Connection 

The goal of the Sun-Earth Connection (SEC) theme in the Office of Space Science 
is an understanding of the changing Sun and its effects on the Solar System, 
life, and society.  SEC's strategy for understanding this interactive system is 
organized around four fundamental Quests, designed to answer the following 
questions: 1) Why Does the Sun Vary? 2) How Do the Planets Respond to Solar 
Variations? 3) How Do the Sun and Galaxy Interact? 4) How Does Solar Variability 
Affect Life and Society? SEC's challenging science program involves: 1) going to 
new vantage points within the Solar System, and even out into the interstellar 
medium, to make critical measurements; 2) making simultaneous, system-wide 
measurements with constellations of spacecraft that resolve existing space-time 
ambiguities; 3) applying new scientific knowledge strategically to produce 
direct and immediate benefits to our increasingly space-dependent society.  

16.01 Solar Remote Sensing 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): MSFC 

Research proposals are sought that address one of the following aspects of solar 
remote sensing: optics (mirrors), detectors, spectrographs, transmission 
gratings, or magnetographs (polarimetry).  

Optics - Mirrors.  Light gathering mirrors are the primary step in any remote 
sensing.  Large (meter class), lightweight optics are needed for science goals 
outlined in the NASA Sun Earth Connection (SEC) roadmap.  Surface quality 
(figure and mid-frequency errors) must achieve diffraction limited quality.  
Microroughness must be reduced to improve image contrast (scattered light).  
Reflectivity is desired in the spectral range from X-rays through the visible.  

Research on optical coatings and transmission filters is needed.  Improved 
transmission filters for EUV (Robust, improved transmission, solar/FUV blind) 
would greatly enhance our current capability.  

Detectors.  After the primary optical mirror, the most critical item in remote 
sensing is the detector.  Current detectors generally are CCDs or some other 
Cartesian devise that have the capability of measuring the number of photons 
falling on arrays of (2x103) x (2x103) to (4x103) x (4x103) pixels.  The 
integration times and readout times of these devises are typically on the order 
of 5 seconds.  Devices capable of time resolution of 1 second or less.  

An idealized device would have the same characteristics, but would also be able 
to resolve the energy of the photons.  The energy range should be from hard X-
rays through the visible and be able to distinguish velocities to   1 km/s or 
better.  A further enhancement would be the ability to measure the angle and 
degree of polarization to determine magnetic fields to better than 5 gauss.  
This would allow for the elimination of spectrographs and thus greatly reduce 
the size and weight of current instruments.  It would also greatly enhance the 
time resolution of spectroscopic measurements.  

Spectrographs.  In view of the difficulty in obtaining energy resolving 
detectors it is necessary that spectrograph technology be further advanced.  Low 
scatter, variable line spaced gratings are needed to support moderate 
resolution EUV solar diagnostic spectroscopy with reasonable efficiency, good 
control of aberrations, and high contrast.  Blazed ion etched holographic 
gratings are one possible approach.  

Active gratings (e.g., gratings replicated onto a deformable spherical or 
toroidal substrate) may be useful as the wavelength(s) at which aberrations are 
corrected may be tuned by changes to the surface figure without effect on the 
efficiency properties (which are determined by groove profiles at the submicron 
level).  Grating metrology techniques that validate designs, high efficiency, 
and low scatter of gratings are needed.  

Techniques are needed which result in very high line densities (e.g., > 6000/mm) 
for higher dispersion EUV and FUV solar spectroscopy.  

Transmission Gratings.  Nanometer-period transmission gratings (TG) are a key 
enabling technology for several types of space physics and astrophysics 
instrumentation.  Space usage of TG falls into two categories: 1) X-ray/EUV 
spectroscopy and 2) UV filtering.  

TG will be used on the IMAGE and TWINS missions to provide UV blocking in the 
MENA neutral-atom imaging experiment.  Medium-energy neutral atoms (200 eV to 
100 keV range) are emitted by important components of magnetospheres and are 
rich with information about the parent plasma population.  Neutral atoms are 
typically accompanied by very large UV fluxes that are difficult to block in the 
medium-energy range without severely attenuating and scattering the atoms.  
Metal TG fabricated with deep and narrow slots are extremely good blockers 
of Lyman alpha UV radiation (the dominant contamination).  Slots narrower than 
50 nm are required.  Competing UV filter technologies require much larger and 
heavier instrumentation to achieve equivalent sensitivity.  Best current-
generation UV filters have UV/particle discrimination exceeding one million, but 
achieve geometric transmissions of less than 5 percent.  This is unacceptable 
for future missions with stringent size and mass limits, since it requires a 
large instrument to detect the low-flux particles.  Increases in the geometric 
transmission of 5-10X are desired using extensions of current technology, 
enabling technology for MENA imaging on future micro-satellites.  

Magnetograph - Polarimetry.  The HRSOT mission is designed to do polarimetery to 
measure magnetic fields above the Sun's photosphere.  To accomplish this we 
would need a telescope of 2 m for resolution, but 4 m for signal to noise on the 
magnetograph.  The various pieces needed in this development would be: 

- A tunable, high spectral resolution, multi-etalon Fabry-Perot filters for use 
in the FUV (wavelengths between 3000 A and Lyman alpha).  The goal is to develop 
filters with transmissions of 50 percent and FWHM of 10 milli- Angstroms.  Two 
major efforts are envisaged, first in the development of materials in boules of 
the right size and purity to fabricate FUV etalons, and second in the 
development of high finesse mounts for the etalons that will withstand the 
rigors of launch.  Material selection should pay attention to their radiation 
hardness.  
- Narrow band (Delta lamda =0.5 A) blocking filters for the FUV with peak 
transmissions of greater than 35 percent are required to isolate particular 
spectral lines within the broad waveband coverage of the coatings.  The 
blocking filters need to be customized for specific emission lines.  e.g., CIV 
at 1550 A.  
- High sensitivity, large area, low voltage array detectors for use in the 
FUV (better than 2 k x 2 k CCDs with QE's of 35 percent or better at 1200 A.) 
- Coating technology required to deposit FUV broad band, high reflectance 
coatings on a variety of optical elements.  Requirements are for a Delta 
lamda=1000 A and reflectivity's of ~98 percent.  
- High sensitivity polarimeters for the analysis of linear polarization below 
10-4.  

16.02 Particles and Field Instruments 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Research designed to improve our knowledge and understanding of the Sun-
Planetary Connections requires accurate measurement of the composition, flow, 
and thermodynamic state of space plasmas and their interactions with 
atmospheres.  Low energy charged particle analyzers and DC to RF electromagnetic 
field sensors provide direct in situ measurements.  This instrumentation is 
often severely constrained by spacecraft resources.  Therefore, miniaturization, 
low power consumption and autonomy are common technological challenges across 
this entire category of sensors.  Specific technologies are sought in the 
following categories: 

Plasma Sensors 
- Improved techniques for imaging of charged particle (electrons and ions) 
velocity distributions.  
- Improved techniques for the regulation of spacecraft floating potential 
near the local plasma potential, with minimal impacts on the ambient plasma and 
field environment.  
- Low power digital time-of-flight analyzer chips and waveform generators 
with sub-nanosecond resolution and multiple channels of parallel processing.  
- Miniaturized, radiation-tolerant, autonomous electronic systems for the 
above.  

Fields Sensors 
- Improved techniques for measurement of plasma floating potential and DC 
electric field (and by extension the plasma drift velocity), especially in the 
direction parallel to the spin axis of a spinning spacecraft.  
- Measurement of the gradient of the electric field in space around a single 
spacecraft or cluster of spacecraft.  
- Improved techniques for the measurement of the gradients (curl) of the 
magnetic field in space local to a single spacecraft or group of spacecraft.  
- Direct measurement of the local electrical current density at spatial and 
time resolutions typical of space plasma structures such as shocks, 
magnetopauses, and auroral arcs.  
- Miniaturized, radiation-tolerant and autonomous electronic systems for the 
above.  

Electromagnetic Radiation Sensors 
- Radar sounding and echo imaging of plasma density and field structures from 
orbiting spacecraft.  

16.03 Remote Sensing for Planetary Magnetosphere/Aeronomy and Outer Heliosphere 
Missions 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

The Sun-Earth-Connections theme studies the Sun, its photon and particle 
emissions, and the subsequent responses of the Earth and planets.  This involves 
remote sensing of the upper atmospheres of the Earth and planets, their 
magnetospheres and interfaces with the solar wind, the heliosphere and the Sun.  
Traditional remote sensing of photon emissions (Radar to gamma-rays) is now 
aided by remote sensing of ion populations via neutral atom cameras.  
Technologies are sought in the two categories below: 

Photon Remote Sensing (radar to infra-red through X-ray and gamma-ray 
wavelengths) 
- Advanced lightweight, diffraction-limited mirrors.  
- Advanced optical spectrograph components.  
- Advanced detectors for visible through X-ray.  
- Improved techniques for spectrometric imaging of IR emissions from planetary 
atmospheres and ionospheres, such as large array (8 Mpixel) CCD cameras (0.35-2 
micron), holographically enhanced Fabry-Perot interferometers, and tunable IR 
lasers (2-5 micron) based on, e.g., quantum cascades.  
- Improved techniques for spectrometric imaging of visible and UV emissions 
from regions of energetic plasma phenomena interacting with atmospheric gases, 
such as aurora and day-glow cameras.  
- Improved techniques for spectrometric imaging of X/Gamma-ray emissions from 
planetary and cometary atmospheres and ionospheres, such as solid state 
photomultiplier devices for use in combination with scintillation detectors.  

Plasma Remote Sensing (e.g., neutral atom cameras) 
- Advanced neutral atom imagers for energies from a few eV to 100 keV to 
remotely sense ion populations in the heliosphere and in the magnetospheres of 
the planets.  
- Techniques for the high-efficiency and robust imaging of energetic neutral 
atoms covering any part of the energy spectrum from 1 eV to 100 keV.  

16.04 Spacecraft Technology for Nanosats 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): JPL 

Research development must be geared toward enabling and enhancing technologies 
needed for a 100-spacecraft constellation of scientific nanosats studying the 
Earth's magnetosphere.  All proposed technology must ultimately be suitable for 
use on SEC nanosats, roughly envisioned to have mass of ~10 kg, total electrical 
power < 10 W, and cylindrical dimensions of ~ 30 cm in diameter and ~10 cm high.  
Specific technologies needed are: 

- Nanosat avionics that are ultra-low power (< 1 W), low mass (< 250 g), and 
radiation-tolerant; advanced packaging to meet nanosat volume and mass.  
- Guidance, navigation, and control sensors and actuators such as sun/earth 
sensors and star trackers suitable for nanosats spinning at 20 rpm, satellite 
positioning, and automated ground systems.  
- Low-mass, high energy storage batteries suitable for 10-kg, 10-W nanosats 
with eclipse periods of several hours.  
- Low-mass, low cost multifunctional structures that incorporate elements 
such as power, thermal, electrical and attitude control systems.  
- Advances in manufacturing to enable low cost production of up to 100 
scientific nanosats, improved efficiencies to reduce spacecraft cost, labor, and 
schedule time.  
- Passive and active thermal control technologies suitable for nanosat size 
and power limits yet capable of handling eclipse periods of several hours.  
- Cost-effective measures to ensure and verify spacecraft compatibility with 
SEC science instruments such electrically conductive surfaces (solar arrays & 
thermal control surfaces), active devices that help reduce spacecraft potential, 
and radiation tolerance & shielding.  
- Communications with the earth will be at X-band, and advances in antennas 
or high-efficiency solid-state amplifiers will enable an EIRP of at least -3dBW.  
- Systems that lead to greater constellation autonomy (and reduced operational 
expenses); systems that increase the science return possible given bandwidth, 
ground station constraints; management, analysis, and visualization tools for 
SEC constellation data (e.g., magnetometer, plasma analyzer, energetic particle 
detection).  
- Low-mass, high reliability mechanisms for deployment of nanosats and 
booms.  
- Low-mass, low-power propulsion technologies for both delta-V and attitude 
control of spinning nanosats, such as mini solid rocket motors and cold-gas 
microthrusters.  

16.05 Solar Sails 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): LaRC 

The objective of this topic is to stimulate breakthroughs in technologies 
associated with solar sails.  Solar sails are envisioned as a low cost, 
efficient transport system for future deep space missions.  They are baselined 
for several strategic missions in the Sun-Earth Connection (SEC) Space Science 
theme, including Solar Polar Imager and Interstellar Probe, a solar sail mission 
to explore interstellar space.  Missions in the Exploration of the Solar System 
(ESS) theme would be broadly enhanced by the availability of proven, solar sail 
technology.  

Areas in which innovations are sought include lowering the cost of sail 
development and application, enhancing sail delivery performance, and reducing 
the risks associated with sail development and application.  Innovations are 
sought in but not limited to the following areas: 

- Packaging and deployment.  
- Materials.  
- Structure/systems.  
- Fabrication.  
- System control (attitude, etc.).  
- Maneuver/navigation.  
- Operations.  
- Durability/survivability.  
- Sail impact on science.

Three parameters have been used for sail definition in mission applications that 
imply levels of technology capability: sail size, sail survivability for close 
solar approaches, and areal density (ratio of mass of the sail to area of the 
sail).  Keeping in mind that overall system metrics are cost, benefit, and risk, 
technologies geared toward following wide range of sail sizes, solar closest 
approach distances, and areal densities are of interest: 

Sail sizes from the very small (meter-sized; e.g., for use with tiny payloads or 
use as auxiliary propulsion) to the medium (50-100 m size, for achieving high-
inclination solar orbits) and ultimately to the very large (hundreds of meters; 
e.g., for use in leaving solar system at high speed).  

- Closest solar approaches from 1 AU down to 0.1 AU.  
- Areal densities from 0.1 to 10 g/m**2.  

17 Structure and Evolution of the Universe 

The goal of the Office of Space Science's Structure and Evolution of the 
Universe (SEU) theme is to seek the answer to three fundamental questions: 1) 
What is the Structure of the Universe and what is our Cosmic Destiny? 2) What 
are the cycles of matter and energy in the evolving Universe? 3) What are the 
ultimate limits of gravity and energy in the Universe? SEU's strategy for 
understanding this interactive system is organized around four fundamental 
Quests, designed to answer the following questions: A) Identify dark matter and 
learn how it shapes galaxies and systems of galaxies, B) Explore where and when 
chemicals elements were made, C) Understand the cycles in which matter, energy 
and magnetic fields are exchanged between stars and the gas between stars, D) 
Discover how gas flows in disks and how cosmic jets formed, E) Identify the 
sources of gamma-ray bursts and high energy cosmic rays and F) Measure how 
strong gravity operates near black holes and how it affects the early universe.  
The technologies needed to achieve these goals fall into the following 
categories: 1) Detectors and sensors, 2) Optical systems and lightweight 
systems, 3) Long lived Cryo-coolers, Thermal control and Cryogenic Support 
Systems, 4) Precision station keeping and metrology, 5) Gravitational, Submm, UV 
and X-ray Interferometry Technologies, 6) Ultra Long Duration Balloon 
Technologies.

17.01 Detectors and Sensors for Astrophysics
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): JPL 

Space science sensor and detector technology innovations are sought in the 
following areas: 

Gravity Waves.  The next generation of gravitational missions will require 
greatly improved inertial sensors.  Such an inertial sensor must provide a 
carefully fabricated test mass which has interactions with external forces 
(i.e., low magnetic susceptibility, high degree of symmetry, low variation in 
electrostatic surface potential, etc) below 10-16 of the Earth's gravity, over 
time scales from several seconds to several hours.  The inertial sensor must 
also provide a housing for containing the proof mass in a suitable environment 
(i.e., high vacuum, low magnetic and electrostatic potentials, etc.).  

Space VLBI.  Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) systems with one element 
in space (called Space VLBI) need development of space-borne low-power low-noise 
amplifiers (down to 20 K at 43 GHz and 86 GHz) with wide bandwidths (up to 2 
GHz), to serve as primary receiving instruments.  Also needed are light-weight, 
deployable (up to 50-meters diameter), space-borne radio telescopes with high 
efficiency at millimeter-wave observing bands (up to 86 GHz), to serve as 
primary observing instruments.
 
High Energy.  The next generation of astrophysics observatories for the 
ultraviolet (UV), X-ray, and gamma-ray bands require order-of-magnitude 
performance advances in detectors, detector arrays, readout electronics and 
other supporting and enabling technologies.  Although the relative value of the 
improvements may differ among the three energy regions, many of the parameters 
where improvements are needed are present in all three bands.  In particular, 
all bands need improvements in spatial and spectral resolutions, in the ability 
to cover large areas, and in the ability to support the readout of the 
thousands/millions of resultant spatial resolution elements.  The SEU program 
seeks innovative technologies to enhance the scope, efficiency and resolution of 
instrument systems at all energies/wavelengths.  

- Advanced CCD detectors, including improvements in UV quantum efficiency and 
read noise, to increase the limiting sensitivity in long exposures and improved 
radiation tolerance.  Electron-bombarded CCD detectors, including improvements 
in efficiency, resolution, and global and local count rate capability.  In the 
X-ray, we seek to extend the response to lower energies in some CCDs, and to 
higher, perhaps up to 50 keV, in others.  
- Significant improvements in wide band gap (such as GaN and AlGaN) materials, 
individual detectors, and arrays for UV applications.  
- Improved microchannel plate detectors, including improvements to the plates 
themselves (smaller pores, greater lifetimes, alternative fabrication 
technologies, e.g., silicon), as well as improvements to the associated 
electronic readout systems (spatial resolution, signal-to-noise capability, 
dynamic range), and in sealed tube fabrication yield.  
- Imaging from low Earth orbit of air fluorescence UV light generated by giant 
airshowers by ultra-high energy(E > 1019 eV) cosmic rays require the development 
of high sensitivity and efficiency detection of 300 - 400 nm UV photons to 
measure signals at the few photon (single photo-electron) level.  A secondary 
goal minimizes the sensitivity to photons with a wavelength greater than 400 nm.  
High electronic gain (~ 106), low noise, fast time response (< 10 ns), minimal 
dead time (< 5 percent dead time at 10 ns response time), high segmentation with 
low dead area (< 20 percent nominal, < 5 percent goal), and the ability to 
tailor pixel size to match that dictated by the imaging optics.  Optical designs 
under consideration dictate a pixel size ranging from approximately 2 x 2 
mm^2 to 10 x 10 mm^2.  Focal plane mass must be minimized (2 g/cm^2 goal).  
Individual pixel readout.  The entire focal plane detector can be formed from 
smaller, individual sub-arrays.  
- Advanced X-ray calorimetry improvements in several areas are needed, 
including: superconducting electronics for cryogenic X-ray detectors such as 
SQUID-based amplifiers and multiplexers for low impedance cryogenic sensors and 
super-conducting single electron transistors and multiplexers for high impedance 
cryogenic sensors, micromachining techniques that enhance the fabrication, 
energy resolution, or count rate capability of closely-packed arrays X-ray 
calorimeters operating in the energy range from 0.1 keV to 10 keV, and surface 
micromachining techniques for improving integration of X-ray calorimeters with 
read-out electronics in large scale arrays.  
- Improvements in readout electronics, including low power ASICs and the 
associated high density interconnects and component arrays to interface them to 
detector arrays.  
- Improvements in material growth techniques for solid state hard X-ray 
detectors.  
- Large format detectors for use with "lobster eye" X-ray optics.  Could be 
arrays of CCDs, silicon strip detectors, or gas micro-strip or micro-gap 
detectors, optimized for low energy X-ray operation in relatively low-rate 
environments.  
- Superconducting tunnel junction devices and transition edge sensors for the UV 
and X-ray regions.  For the UV, these offer a promising path to having "three-
dimensional" arrays (spatial plus energy).  Improvements in energy resolution, 
pixel count, count rate capability, and long wavelength rejection are of 
particular interest.  We seek techniques for fabrication of close packed arrays, 
with any requisite thermal isolation, and sensitive (SQUID or single electron 
transistor), fast, readout schemes and/or multiplexers.  
- Arrays of CZT detectors of thickness 5 to 10 mm to cover the 10 - 500 keV 
range, and hybrid detector systems with a Si CCD over a CZT pixelated detector 
operating in the 2 - 150 keV range.  
- Micro-well structures on amorphous thin film transistor arrays for two-
dimensional pixel readout with fine pitch (few hundred microns) for large X-ray 
and gamma-ray area arrays (meters scale).  

17.02 Astrophysical Observing Systems 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): JPL, LaRC, MSFC 

The NASA Space Science Enterprise is studying future missions to explore the 
Structure and Evolution of the Universe, which will require very large space 
observatories.  In order to understand the Structure and Evolution of the 
Universe, a variety of observatories are necessary to observe cosmic phenomena 
from radio waves to the highest energy cosmic rays.  These observatories will 
peer farther and view objects more fainter than current Earth-based or space-
based observatories and therefore will have increased resolution and light-
gathering ability by greatly increasing the aperture size.  It also will be 
necessary to operate some of these telescopes at cryogenic temperatures and at a 
substantial distance from the Earth.  Apertures for normal incidence optics are 
required in the range of 20 - 40 m in diameter, while grazing incidence optics 
are required to support apertures up to 10 m in diameter.  For some missions, 
these apertures will form a constellation of telescopes operating as 
interferometers.  These interferometric observatories will have effective 
apertures in the 100 - 1000 m diameter range.  

The observatories required for many future SEU missions will also be operated at 
cryogenic temperatures (30 K) and at a substantial distance from the Earth.  
Therefore, low mass of critical components such as the primary mirror and 
support and/or deployment structure is extremely important.  It is also 
essential to develop actuators, deformable mirrors and other components for 
operation in a cryogenic environment.  In order to meet the stringent optical 
alignment and tolerances necessary for a high quality telescope and to provide a 
robust design, there are potential significant benefits possible from employing 
systems that can adaptively correct for image degrading sources from inside and 
outside the spacecraft.  This subtopic also includes correction systems for 
large aperture space telescopes that require control across the entire 
wavefront, typically at low bandwidth.  The following technologies are sought: 

- Large, ultra-lightweight optical mirrors including membrane optics for very 
large aperture space telescopes and interferometers.  
- Large, ultra-lightweight grazing incidence optics for X-ray mirrors with 
angular resolutions less than 5 arcsec.  
- Ultra-precise, low mass deployable structures to reduce launch volume for 
large-aperture space telescopes and interferometers.  
- Segmented optical systems with high-precision controls; active and/or 
adaptive mirrors; shape control of deformable telescope mirrors; image 
stabilization systems.  
- Advanced, wavefront sensing and control systems including image based 
wavefront sensors.  
- Shape measurement and control of large aperture membrane optics.  
- Wavefront correction techniques and optics for large aperture membrane 
mirrors and refractors (curved lenses, fresnel lenses, diffractive lenses).  
- Cryogenic optics, structures, and mechanisms for space telescopes and 
interferometers.  
- Nanometer and picometer metrology for space telescopes and interferometers.  
- High-precision pointing and attitude control systems for large space 
telescopes and interferometers.  
- Space-fabricated optics and techniques including fabrication from raw 
materials or blanks, coatings, assembly of components, metrology, and system 
testing.  
- High-performance materials and fabrication processes for ultra-lightweight, 
high performance optics.  
- Advanced analytical models, simulations, and evaluation techniques and new 
integrations of suites of existing software tools allowing a broader and more 
in-depth evaluation of design alternatives and identification of optimum system 
parameters including optical, thermal, and structural performance of large space 
telescopes and interferometers.  
- Advanced, low cost, high quality large optics fabrication processes and 
test methods including active metrology feedback systems during fabrication, and 
artificial intelligence controlled systems.  
- Technologies for testing new mirror materials and shapes in relevant 
environments including cryogenic testing.  
- New coatings and methods for applying them.  
- Long path length measurement techniques.  
- Innovative solutions to detect and correct errors in deployed optical 
systems.  
- Deployable optical benches to achieve reference baseline dimensions greater 
than those of the payload envelope.  
- High resolution (2 nm) long stroke (6mm) cryogenic actuators.  
- Wide field of view optics using square pore slumped micro-channel plates or 
equivalent.  
- Coded masks for 5 mm x 5 mm x 5 mm pixels of high-Z passive metal (Pb or W) 
and ~4 m^2 area.  
- Grazing incidence focusing mirrors with response up to 150 keV.  
- Develop fabrication techniques for ultra-thin-flat silicon (or like material) 
for grating substrates for X-ray energies < 0.5 keV.  
- Large area thin blocking filters with high efficiency at low energy X-ray 
energies (< 600 eV).  

Novel optical materials, specialized optical fabrication techniques, and new 
optical metrology instruments and 
components for Earth- and space-based applications are needed, as follows: 

- Develop novel materials and fabrication techniques for producing ultra-
lightweight mirrors, high-performance diamond turned optics, and ultra-smooth 
(2-3 angstrom rms) replicated optics that are both rigid and lightweight.  
Lightweight silicon carbide optics and structures are also desired.  
- Develop optics for focusing EUV and X-ray radiation, where reductions in 
fabrication time and cost are sought.  Developments are also needed in the areas 
of surface roughness and figure characterization of EUV and curved X-ray optics, 
especially Wolter systems.  
- Develop novel materials and fabrication techniques for producing cryogenic 
optics.  Testing techniques, including both full- and sub-aperture testing, for 
cryogenic optics are needed.  Also desired are techniques for testing the 
durability of and stress in coatings used in harsh environments, 
particularly cryogenic optics.  
- Develop novel techniques for producing and measuring coatings and 
polarization control elements.  Optical coatings for use in the EUV, UV, 
visible, IR and far IR for filters, beamsplitters, polarizers, and reflectors 
will be considered.  Broadband polarizing- and non-polarizing cube-type 
beamsplitters are also needed.  
- Perform development related to fabrication of X-ray, gamma-ray, and 
neutron collimators that have the precision necessary to achieve arcsecond or 
sub-arcsecond imaging in solar physics and astrophysics when used in stationary 
multi-grid arrays or as rotating modulation.  
- Develop portable and miniaturized state-of-the-art optical characterization 
instrumentation and rapid, large-area surface-roughness characterization 
techniques are needed.  Also, develop calibrated processes for determination 
of surface roughness using replicas made from the actual surface.  Traceable 
surface roughness standards suitable for calibrating profilometers over sub-
micron to millimeter wavelength ranges are needed.  
- Develop instruments capable of rapidly determining the approximate surface 
roughness of an optical surface, allowing modification of process parameters to 
improve finish, without the need to remove the optic from the polishing machine.  
Techniques for testing the figure of large, convex aspheric surfaces to 
fractional wave tolerances in the visible are needed.  
- Develop efficient, analytical, optical modeling and analysis programs 
capable of determining the ground-based and space-based performance of complex 
aberrated optical telescopes and instrument systems will be considered.  Also, 
simple, well documented, flexible programs which generate commands to operate a 
numerically controlled polishing machine, given the tool wear profile and 
surface error map are desired.  
- Develop very low scattered light optical material thin film mirror coatings or 
mirrors for broad-band white light applications to planet detection space 
telescopes.  
- Develop a novel material for producing doubly curved, ultra-thin, unsupported 
shell optical quality telescope mirrors which are capable of being rolled for 
storage and transport.  These mirrors will exceed one meter in diameter, have an 
areal density of < 1.5 kg/m2, and have sufficient "memory" to enable it to 
return to its original configuration when unfurled.  Fine adjustment will be 
achieved using actuator material embedded within the shell mirror or with a two-
stage optics system or both.  The reflective surface would not be damaged when 
the mirror is rolled.  This material must tolerate the space environment without 
dimensional changes, stiffness changes, or loss of mechanical integrity.  

17.03 Gravitational, Submillimeter, UV and X-Ray Interferometry 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): none 

Interferometry figures prominently in NASA's plans for 21st century Space 
Science.  The Structure and Evolution of the Universe roadmap includes multiple 
projects which use interferometry for the detection and imaging of astrophysical 
sources.  Both monolithic and free formation-flying interferometer systems are 
contemplated.  The objective in all cases is to use the extraordinary resolution 
offered by interferometry to explore the structure of our universe as seen 
across the electromagnetic spectrum and as represented by gravitational waves 
generated by the dynamics of dense matter regions.  This topic is looking for 
high-payoff, innovative concepts that will help to achieve the interferometry 
goals, including reduction of cost and schedule.  

Gravitational-Wave Interferometry.  Innovative technologies for supporting the 
measurement of low-frequency (0.1 - 0.001 mHz) gravitational waves, by 
measurement of the change of distance between freely falling proof masses which 
are caused by gravitational waves.  Examples of needed technologies are:

Inertial Sensors.  Provide free-falling proof mass with external housing; noise 
forces on proof mass must produce accelerations less than 3x10-15 m/s/s/sqrt 
(Hz) (corresponding to displacement noise < 1 picometers rms over 100 seconds); 
position of proof mass with respect to housing must be measured with accuracy < 
1 nanometer rms over 100 seconds.  

Stablized Lasers.  Greater than 1 watt single mode power with very narrow 
linewidth (typically a few kiloherz), which can be externally stabilized to 
better than 1 Hz rms at 100 second time scales.  Laser Phase-Tracking System.  
Measure beat-frequency between two laser signals with frequency difference up to 
10 MHz with accuracy better than one-millionth of a cycle over 1-1000 seconds.  

X-ray Interferometry.  Technologies to support acquisition and tracking of X-ray 
fringes from separate collecting optics, which may be on different spacecraft.  
Examples of needed technologies include.

Precision Optics.  Produce X-ray flats (~1 cm x 1 m) with surface accuracy 
better than 1/200 of a (633 nm) wavelength, to allow for high X-ray fringe 
visibility.  

Laser Metrology.  Laser metrology gauge systems and components are needed to 
provide high-finesse baseline range sensing.  Precision requirements vary with 
application, ranging from 50 picometers for a 10 meter baseline to 10's of nm 
for a 1 km baseline, and a few picometers for a thousand kilometer baseline.  
Full aperture metrology gauge schemes appear to be essential.  

Vibration Isolation and Suppression.  Concepts, components, subsystems, 
algorithms, and software to isolate, attenuate and suppress vibrational motions 
of the structure and key components when subjected to excitation over a broad 
frequency range.  The amplitude of the vibrations to be suppressed is in the 1-
10 nanometer range, with frequencies ranging up to 100 Hz.  

Submillimeter Interferometry.  Technologies to support acquisition and tracking 
of sub-millimeter and far-infrared fringes from separate collecting optics, 
which may be on different spacecraft.  Examples of needed technologies include.  

Beam-Splitter/Combiner.  Optical elements(s) to split and combine signals in the 
40-200 micron band.  

Dual-Star Feed.  Optics to concentrate light from different parts of sky onto at 
least two discrete detectors.  

Correlators.  Low-power low-mass devices to cross-multiply signals from 
heterodyne detectors.  

17.04 Thermal Control and Cryogenic Systems 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): ARC, JPL, JSC, MSFC 

Future spacecraft and instruments for NASA's Space and Earth Science Enterprises 
will require increasingly sophisticated thermal control technology to meet the 
demands of tight control and minimal mass.  Heat load centers may be more 
numerous and more widely dispersed, flux levels may increase, cryogenic 
instrument applications will be more common, and very tight temperature control 
will be required.  Some applications may require significantly increased power 
levels while others may require extremely low heat loss for extended periods.  
The advent of very small spacecraft will also drive the need for new 
technologies, particularly since such small spacecraft will have low thermal 
capacitance.  This situation, combined with the need for tighter temperature 
control, will present a challenging situation when such spacecraft/instruments 
undergo transients.  The use of "off-the-shelf" commercial spacecraft buses for 
science instruments will also present challenges.  In general, low cost, low 
weight, and high reliability are prime technology drivers.  Specific areas for 
which innovative proposals are sought include: 

- Advanced thermal control coatings such as variable emissive surfaces that are 
controllable.  
- Cryogenic (4 K to 80 K) heat transport devices which incorporate a diode 
function.  
- Advanced thermoelectric coolers capable of providing 100s of milliwatts of 
cooling at 150 K and below.  
- Phase change devices for thermal storage.  
- Advanced analytical techniques for thermal modeling, focusing on techniques 
that can be easily integrated with emerging mechanical and optical analytical 
tools.  
- Highly reliable Loop Heat Pipes and CPLs which allow multiple heat load 
sources and multiple sinks.  

Many future space missions will have operational lifetimes of 5 to 15 years and 
will require similar lifetimes for cryogenic cooling systems.  Both the lifetime 
and the reliability of the cryogenic systems are critical performance concerns.  
Mechanical coolers, thermoelectric coolers, radiative coolers, and combinations 
of these will be considered.  Of interest are cryogenic coolers for cooling 
detectors, telescopes and instruments with long life, low vibration, low mass, 
low cost, and high efficiency.  Specific areas of interest include: 

- Highly efficient coolers in the range of 3-8 Kelvin as well as 50 milli-Kelvin 
and below.  
- Essentially vibration-free cooling systems such as reverse Brayton cycle 
cooler technologies.  
- Highly reliable, efficient, low cost Stirling and pulse tube cooler 
technologies.  
- Highly efficient magnetic cooling technologies, particularly at very low 
temperatures.  
- MEMS and miniature solid-state cooler systems.  
- Hybrid cooling systems that make optimal use of radiative coolers.  

17.05 Terrestrial and Extraterrestrial Balloons and Aerobots 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): JPL 

Innovations in materials, structures, and systems concepts have enabled buoyant 
vehicles to play an expanding role in NASA's Space and Earth Science 
Enterprises.  A new generation of large, stratospheric balloons based on 
advanced balloon envelope technologies will be able to deliver payloads of 
several thousand kilograms to above 99.9 percent of the Earth's absorbing 
atmosphere and maintain them there for months of continuous observation.  
Balloons will also carry scientific payloads on Mars, Venus, Titan, and the 
outer planets in order to investigate their atmospheres in situ and their 
surfaces from close proximity.  Their envelopes will be subject to extreme 
environments and must support missions with a range of durations.  Robotic 
balloons, known as aerobots, have a wide range of potential applications both on 
earth and on other solar system bodies.  Miniature balloons capable of long 
duration flight also are emerging as an important tool in planetary exploration, 
terrestrial climate investigations, and weather prediction.  Such balloons also 
have potential significance for commercial communications.  NASA is seeking 
innovative and cost effective solutions in support of terrestrial and 
extraterrestrial balloons and aerobots in the following areas: 

Materials 
- Membranes for terrestrial applications having strengths in excess of 7600 N/m 
and areal densities less than 40 g/m^2.  Also desired are films, fibers, and 
innovative construction techniques that would lead to composite membranes 
achieving these strength and density goals.  Additional material design 
considerations include resistance to UV degradation, operating temperatures 
between 180 K and 300 K, resistance to fracture, low helium permeability, and 
good handling and folding characteristics.  
- Membranes for extraterrestrial applications having yield strengths in excess 
of 150-200 MPa and areal densities less than 10-12 g/m^2.  Also desired are 
films, fibers, and innovative construction techniques that would lead to 
composite membranes achieving these strength and density goals.  For planetary 
applications operating temperatures are 70-90 K (Titan), 140-300 K (Mars) and 
250-750 k (Venus).  

Support systems 
- Trajectory control techniques for maneuvering terrestrial and extraterrestrial 
aerobots both horizontally and vertically.  
- Low weight power systems for terrestrial balloons that produce 2 kW or more 
continuously.  
- Power systems that enable long duration, polar night missions.  
- Innovative, low cost, low power, low weight, precision pointing systems that 
permit arcsecond or better accuracy.  

Design and Fabrication 
- Efficient and cost-effective balloon envelope seaming, fabrication, and 
inspection techniques that lower costs and increase quality.  
- Innovative balloon design concepts that reduce material strength requirements, 
increase reliability, enhance performance, or improve mission flexibility.  

18 Astronomical Search for Origins 

NASA's Origin's Program seeks the answers to two broad questions related to life 
on earth as we know it: how we got here, and are we alone? The answers lie in an 
understanding of how galaxies, stars, and planetary systems formed in the early 
universe.  We must determine whether planetary systems and earth like planets 
are typical companions of average stars and if life beyond earth is a rare, 
possibly nonexistent, occurrence or if it is robust and has spread throughout 
the galaxy.  Origin's primary mission goals are to study the early universe, 
find planets around other stars, and search for life beyond Earth.  The 
technologies and discoveries needed to achieve these goals fall into the 
categories of very large space observatory systems, precision spacecraft 
constellations, advanced astronomical instrumentation, and new techniques for 
laboratory astrobiology.  

18.01 Large Telescope Systems 
Lead Center: MSFC  
Participating Center(s): GSFC, JPL, LaRC 

The long-range goal of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems 
(ASO) theme in the Space Science Enterprise is to detect, characterize, and 
ultimately image extra-solar planets in orbit around nearby stars.  Results from 
these efforts may provide clues as to the existence of life on these planets and 
the nature of life within our own solar system.  The level of image resolution 
needed to accomplish these observations requires the development of telescopes 
with light gathering apertures that are many times the size of NASA's 8-meter 
Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST).  Such large aperture requirements have 
recently stimulated the development of new and unconventional telescope design 
concepts; ranging from single light collection stations employing a myriad of 
distributed reflective mirrors to constellations of large telescopes flying in 
formation and operating as interferometers.  

In addition to a large aggregate aperture requirement, these new observatories 
must maintain a low areal density (including the optics, reaction structure, 
actuators, and wiring).  100 kg/m2 is typical for conventional telescopes, and 
NGST is striving to achieve between 10 and 15 kg/m2.  However, for ASO missions 
and other future telescope programs, areal densities of ~1 kg/m2 or less are 
required to enable affordable and launchable system architectures.  Other system 
design considerations include; the ability to deploy components from a stowed 
launch configuration to a final on-orbit configuration without degrading the 
system's optical quality, the need for precise structural and system control 
mechanisms used to maintain diffraction-limited imaging capabilities, and the 
ability to successfully endure and perform within the harsh space environment.  

Specifically, this subtopic is soliciting concepts and enabling technologies for 
large space-based telescope systems designed to accomplish either near-term 
objectives (i.e., ~10m apertures and 1-10 kg/m^2 areal densities) and/or far-
term objectives (i.e., 20-40 m apertures and < 1 kg/m^2 areal densities).  
Specific areas of interest include: 

- Novel concepts for space telescope system design and implementation.  
- Active/adaptive wavefront sensing and control at ambient and cryogenic 
temperatures.  
- Large lightweight cryogenic optical materials.  
- Large transmissive optics and optical materials.  
- Large reflective optics and optical materials.  
- Low cost, in situ metrology techniques for space-deployed optics.  
- Low areal density precision structures.  
- Pliable structures with shape memory.  
- Low weight, low cost actuators for optical surfaces.  
- Deformable, controllable optics.  
- Membrane mirrors.  
- Non-contacting shape control actuation for membrane mirrors.  
- Integral membrane mirror and shape control actuation subsystem.  
- Membrane mirror packaging and deployment.  
- Large aperture telescope structures, materials, and deployment.  

18.02 Precision Constellations for Interferometry 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): GSFC 

(Note: All proposals addressing formation flying and control, other than 
interferometry related applications for the NASA's Origins Program theme, should 
be submitted to the Cross-Enterprise "Formation Control", Subtopic 22.02.) 

In a constellation for large effective telescope apertures, multiple, 
collaborative spacecraft in a precision formation collectively form a variable-
baseline interferometer.  These formations require the capability for autonomous 
precision alignment and synchronized maneuvers, reconfigurations, and collision 
avoidance.  It is important that, in order to enable precision spacecraft 
formation keeping from coarse requirements (relative position control of any two 
spacecraft to less than one cm, and relative bearing of 1 arcmin over target 
range of separations from a few meters to tens of kilometers) to fine 
requirements (micron relative position control and relative bearing control of 
0.1 arcsec), the interferometer payload would still need to provide at least 1 
to 3 orders of magnitudes improvement on top of the S/C control requirements.  
The spacecraft also require onboard capability for optimal path planning, and 
time optimal maneuver design and execution.  

Innovations that address the above precision requirements are solicited for 
distributed constellation systems in the following areas: 

- Integrated optical/formation/control simulation tools.  
- Distributed, multi-timing, high fidelity simulations.  
- Formation modeling techniques.  
- Precision guidance and control architectures and design methodologies.  
- Centralized/decentralized formation estimation.  
- Distributed sensor fusion.
- RF/optical precision metrology systems.  
- Formation sensors.  
- Precision micro-thrusters/actuators.  
- Autonomous re-configurable formation techniques.  
- Optimal, synchronized, maneuver design methodologies.  
- Collision avoidance mechanisms.  
- Formation management and station keeping.  
- Six degrees of freedom precision formation testbeds.  

18.03 Astronomical Instrumentation 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): ARC, GSFC 

Much of the scientific instrumentation used in future NASA observatories for the 
Origins Program theme will be similar in character to instruments used for 
present day space astrophysical observations.  However, the performance and 
observing efficiency of these instruments must be greatly enhanced.  The 
instrument components are expected to offer much higher optical throughput, 
larger fields of view, and better detector performance.  The wavelengths of 
primary interest extend from the infrared to 100 um. These measurement 
techniques include imaging, photometry, spectroscopy and polarimetry.  In 
addition, Origins missions based on optical interferometry are being developed.  
These systems require efficient optical beam combiners and techniques for 
extremely high contrast detection of faint planets near bright stars.  Of 
particular interest are: 

Advanced Detectors (Vis, IR, FIR).  These efforts should propose breakthrough 
capabilities in spectral coverage, large array size with uniform high quantum 
efficiency, low dark current, spectroscopic capabilities, or their ability to 
operate effectively and reproducibly over long periods (ex. 5-10 years of space 
observations at low power, extreme temperatures, etc.  

Optical and Opto-mechanical Instrument Components.  Given the need for miniature 
and multiple capability instruments, there is a growing need for breakthrough 
concepts in instrument optics, which reduce the volume requirements while adding 
capabilities (spectral, or otherwise) to the instrument.  

High Contrast Sensing Techniques (achromatic starlight nulling).  There is a 
need for nulling/blocking of a 20 percent optical bandwidth star image intensity 
within 1 arcsecond (5 microradians) of a dim planetary object.  The required 
nulling ratio is greater than 1 million at a wavelength of 10 microns. Current 
state-of-the-art is 10,000 at visible wavelengths.  

18.04 Astrobiology 
Lead Center: ARC  
Participating Center(s): JPL 

Astrobiology includes the study of the origin, evolution and distribution of 
life in the universe.  New technologies are required to enable us to search for 
extant or extinct life elsewhere in the solar system, to obtain an organic 
history of planetary bodies, to discover and explore water sources elsewhere in 
the solar system and to distinguish microorganisms and biologically important 
molecular structures within complex chemical mixtures.  The search for life on 
other planetary bodies will also require systems capable of moving and deploying 
instruments across and through varied terrain to access biologically important 
environments.  

A second element of Astrobiology is the understanding of the evolutionary 
development of biological processes leading from single cell organisms to multi-
cell specimens and to complex ecological systems over multiple generations.  

Understanding the effects of gravity on the evolution of living systems is a 
fundamental question of substantial, inherent scientific value in our quest to 
understand life.  In addition, radiation of varying levels is assumed to have 
varying effects on the development and evolution of life.  Knowledge of the 
effects of radiation and gravity on lower organisms, plants, humans and other 
animals (as well as elucidation of the basic mechanisms by which these effects 
occur) will be of direct benefit to the quality of life on Earth.  These 
benefits will occur through applications in medicine, agriculture, industrial 
biotechnology, environmental management and other activities dependent on 
understanding biological processes over multiple generations.  

A third component of Astrobiology includes the study of evolution on ecological 
processes.  Astrobiology intersects with NASA Earth Science studies through the 
highly accelerated rate of change in the biosphere being brought about by human 
actions.  One particular area of study with direct links to Earth Science is 
microbe-environment interactions.  These interactions can be seen in carbon 
cycles and nitrogen cycles.  Some examples of rapid changes that affect these 
microbial processes are increases in UV, increases in average and seasonal 
temperatures, and changes in the length of the growing season, all which are key 
issues in both Earth Science and Astrobiology.  

Additional areas include Controlled Environment Sustainability Research (CESR), 
growth chambers and monitoring capabilities.  This research requires unique 
instrumentation and information science technologies that are not covered in the 
Earth Science program.  NASA seeks innovations in the following technology 
areas: 

Mobility/Sampling/Subsurface Water Detection Systems 
- Innovative techniques that meet these needs are required, e.g., for Mars 
exploration, technologies that would enable the aseptic acquisition of deep 
subsurface samples, the detection of aquifers, or enhance the performance of 
long distance ground roving, tunneling, or flight vehicles are required.  For 
Europa exploration, technologies to enable the penetration of deep ice are 
required.  Desirable features for both Mars and Europa exploration include the 
ability to carry an array of instruments and imaging systems, to provide aseptic 
operation mode, and to maintain a pristine research environment.  
- Low cost lightweight systems to assist in the selection and acquisition of the 
most scientifically interesting samples are also of significant interest.  
- High sensitivity (femtomole or better) high resolution methods applicable to 
all biologically relevant classes of compounds for separation of complex 
mixtures into individual components.  

Analytical Tools 
- Advanced in situ and laboratory based microbial sensing/monitoring system 
capable of providing quantitative spatial and temporal visualization of material 
and functions in selected specimens.  
- Advanced miniaturized biological in situ sample acquisition and handling 
systems optimized for extreme environment applications.  
- High sensitivity (femtomole or better) characterization of molecular 
structure, chirality, and isotopic composition of biogenic elements (H, C, N, O, 
S) embodies within individual compounds and structures.  
- High spatial resolution (5 angstrom level) electron microscopy techniques to 
establish details of external morphology, internal structure, elemental 
composition and mineralogical composition of potential biogenic structures.  
- Innovative software to support studies of the origin and evolution of 
life.  The areas of special interest are 1) biomolecular and cellular 
simulations; 2) evolutionary and phylogenetic algorithms and interfaces; 3) DNA 
computation; and 4) image reconstruction and enhancement for remote sensing.  
- Nondestructive structural characterization of micro-areas of microsamples of 
rocks and minerals by diffraction (1-100 micron scale).  

Tools to Support Gravity and Radiation Studies of Biological Systems over 
Multiple Generations These technologies must be miniaturized to minimize weight, 
volume and power requirements and must operate autonomously for extended periods 
of time to accommodate monitoring multiple generations of organisms.  Thus, 
instrumentation must be self-calibrating, require no or minimal consumables and 
be remotely controlled.  

- Biotechnology - determining mutation rates and genetic stability in a variety 
of organisms as well as accurately determining protein regulation changes in 
microgravity and radiation environments.  
- Automated chemical analytical instrumentation for determining gross metabolic 
characteristics of individual organisms and ecologies, as well as chemical 
composition of environments.  
- Imaging technology with high resolution and low power requirements.  
- Habitat support - technologies for supporting miniature ecosystems isolated 
from their support environments, data collection and transmission technologies 
in concert with the automated chemical instrumentation described above.  
Candidate technologies include sensor and telemetry systems as well as variable-
spectrum, low power light sources for simulating conditions on the early Earth.  
- Algorithms for processing and analyzing recovered data.  

Instrumentation and information technologies to support the study of evolution 
of ecological processes and CESR are:

- Miniature to microscopic, high resolution, field worthy, smart sensors or 
instrumentation for the accurate and unattended monitoring of environmental 
parameters that include, but are not limited to, solar radiation (190-800 nm at 
< 1 nm resolution), ions and gases of the various oxidation states of carbon and 
nitrogen (at the nanomolar level for ions in solution and at the femtomolar or 
better level for gases), in a variety of habitats (e.g., marine, freshwater, 
acid/alkaline hot springs, Antarctic climates or boreholes into the Earth).  
- High resolution, high sensitivity (femtomole or better) methods for the 
isolation and characterization of nucleic acids (DNA/RNA) from a variety of 
organic and inorganic matrices.  
- Mathematical models capable of predicting the combined effects of elevated 
pCO2 (change in CO2 over the eons) and solar UV radiation on carbon 
sequestration and N2O emissions from experimental data obtained from field and 
laboratory studies of C-cycling rates, N-cycling rates, as well as diurnal and 
seasonal changes in solar UV.  
- Microscope Digital Array Scanning Interferometer (DASI) or its equivalent to 
study soil cores, microbial communities, pollen samples, etc., in a laboratory 
environment for the detailed spectroscopic analysis relevant to evolution as a 
function of climate changes.  

19 Exploration of the Solar System 

NASA's program for Exploration of the Solar System seeks to answer fundamental 
questions about the Solar System and life:  1) How do planets form? 2) Why are 
planets different from one another? 3) Where did the makings of life come from? 
4) Did life arise elsewhere in the Solar System? 5) What is the future 
habitability of Earth and other planets? The search for answers to these 
questions requires that we augment the current remote sensing approach to solar 
system exploration with a robust program that includes in situ measurements at 
key places in the Solar System, and the return of materials from them for later 
study on the Earth.  We envision a rich suite of missions to achieve this, 
including a comet nucleus sample return, a Europa lander, and a rover or 
balloon-borne experiment on Saturn's moon Titan, to name a few.  Numerous new 
technologies will be required to enable such ambitious missions.  

19.01 Lightweight Materials for Planetary Aerocapture and Balloons 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): none 

The desire to launch deep space mission payloads on lower cost, smaller launch 
vehicles has increased as projects become more constrained due to budget 
pressures.  In light of these factors new concepts of using thin film structures 
or space systems to accomplish mission critical functions such as mobility 
(balloons), aerocapture (ballutes), and deployable multifunctional structures 
(radiators, struts, antenna, etc.) are gaining importance.  Low mass, low 
volume, space asset functionality is critical to enabling new missions to 
withstand the harsh environments (temperature and atmospheric conditions, for 
example) at Venus and Titan if we wish to dramatically reduce the cost of in 
situ science.  We wish to identify, evaluate, and develop thin film materials, 
systems and associated technologies that will be compatible with ballute, 
balloon and the low-mass multifunctional-structure requirements listed below. A 
systems engineering perspective is encouraged.  Proposals should address how 
materials/configurations are compatible with expected preflight configurations, 
subsequent in-flight configurations, and attendant environments.  Materials and 
processes, and their associated mission use constraints, must have the potential 
to meet all important requirements or they will not be considered.  

- Ballute materials for aerocapture missions with high temperature capability (> 
400 C), high emissivity e > 0.8, low mass-areal density < 10 gm/m2, thin films 
with appropriate stability and dynamics response.  The ability to withstand 
aerodynamic stresses/temperatures during deployment and aerocapture sequences.  
- Balloon and aerobot materials and associated seaming technology with 
capability to withstand acidic (sulfuric acid) atmosphere and high temperatures 
(withstand up to 500 C - Venus or in the case of Titan down to -170 C) at areal 
densities of < 10gm/m2.  Low packing density is needed for the launch and cruise 
phase of missions to Venus or Titan.  Issues to address are mass, material 
strength (thin films/composites, metallization, rip stop properties), space 
environment durability and lifetime; retention of properties after tight 
packing; and manufacturing issues including edge capture, joint concepts, and 
prelaunch repair.  
- Low mass multifunctional structures or membranes integrated with electronics, 
power sources, thermal control or communication capabilities, with areal 
densities under 0.1 kg/m2 such that they would be applicable to large area 
ultra-lightweight deployable or inflatable structures.  Specific areas of 
interest are thermal technologies for thin films and membranes; development of 
active or passive thermal control systems and models for the electronics 
integrated with membrane structures; development of substrate thinning and 
bonding processes; development of materials with controllable surface properties 
that, when combined with integrated control electronics, could adapt to changing 
environments or mission needs; space rigidizable thin films; and shape memory 
thin films/low density polymeric materials for deployable structures.  

19.02 Instruments for Conducting In Situ Scientific Measurements 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): ARC 

NASA's space science missions will increasingly rely upon in situ 
characterization of the atmosphere, surface and subsurface regions of planets, 
satellites, and small bodies, and for exobiology.  Achieving Solar System 
exploration goals will require innovative components and miniaturized 
instruments for in situ analysis that offer significant improvement over the 
state of the art in terms of size, mass, power, cost, performance, and 
robustness.  These instruments may be deployed on surface landers and rovers, 
subsurface penetrators, cryobots, and airborne platforms.  These instruments 
must be capable of withstanding operation in space and planetary environmental 
extremes, which include temperature, pressure, radiation, and impact stresses.  
A reasonable target for a science instrument concept is 1-kilogram mass, 1-liter 
volume, and 1 watt-hour of energy, although for mission critical capabilities, 
additional resources might be available.  

A wide range of in situ instruments are of interest - geological, chemical, 
biological, physical, and environmental.  Particular emphasis is needed on 
astrobiology related measurements, seeking to understand the origin and 
evolution of life and pre-biotic processes.  

New in situ analysis techniques for exobiology flight experiments are desired to 
identify and quantify biogenically important elements (C, H, N, O, P, and S) and 
their compounds (e.g., CH4, NOx, H2O) within extraterrestrial atmospheres, 
soils, ices, sedimentary rocks, and minerals.  

Examples of in situ measurement technologies include but are not limited to: 

- Chemical sensing instrumentation for the surface and subsurface chemical and 
isotopic analysis of soils, rocks, and ices, such as Raman spectrometers, laser-
induced breakdown spectrometers, age-dating systems, electrochemical systems, 
thin film sensors, liquid and gas chromatography systems, gas chromatograph-mass 
spectrometers and other mass analyzing systems.  
- Instrumentation focused on biogenically important elements and compounds for 
the identification and characterization of biomarkers of extinct or extant life, 
such as ultraviolet-Raman, infrared reflectance and transmittance spectrometers 
to identify and measure the C, O, and N isotopes in CO2 and NOX with a precision 
of 0.1 percent or better, fluorescence microscopy, total organic carbon 
analyzers, biosensor concepts, ion mobility spectrometers or other molecular 
identification instrumentation capable of operating alone or as part of a gas 
chromatograph system.  
- Sensing instrumentation that integrates such functions as separation, reagent 
addition, and detection, especially using emerging "lab-on-a-chip" technologies.  
- Suboptical microscopy instrumentation to characterize morphology, elemental 
and mineralogical composition, such as electron microscopy techniques and atomic 
force microscopy.  
- Instrumentation for the chemical and isotopic analysis of planetary 
atmospheres.  
- Enabling in situ instrument component and support technologies, such as 2-
10 micron laser sources, miniaturized pumps, sample inlet systems, valves, and 
fluidic technologies for sample preparation.  
- Physical and environmental sensing systems, such as seismic and meteorological 
sensors, humidity sensors, wind and particle size distribution sensors.  
- Particles and fields measurements, such as magnetometers, and electric field 
monitors.  

19.03 Sample Access, Handling, and In Situ Investigation Systems 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): none 

Future scientific exploration of planets and small bodies will require 
improvements in the tools for accessing surface and sub-surface materials for 
sample collection, sample handling, and in situ investigation.  These tools will 
be required to operate in extreme environments including high temperature, high-
pressure environments as well as low temperature, near vacuum environments.  
Novel devices and approaches are needed in the areas of manipulation and 
positioning of instruments; penetration of surface materials that have a wide 
range of properties; acquisition and storage of pre-determined amounts of 
material; protection of samples from handling and environmental damage; and 
placement of samples into analysis systems.  Example technology concepts 
include, but are not limited to, the following: 

- Surface sample handling systems including, for example, miniature sample 
acquisition mechanisms with integrated feedback sensing, low-power miniature 
rock crushing and transport systems, impact technologies for rock fragmentation, 
and sample confinement and containment techniques for sample return missions.  
- Sub-surface sample access systems including, for example, low reaction force 
coring and drilling devices, low power rock ablation devices, and anchoring 
techniques for microgravity bodies.  
- Sample access and collection within aqueous environments including, for 
example, mini-pump and transport systems, sample acquisition within sub-surface 
ice environments, and passive entrapment devices for liquid collection.  

19.04 Technologies for the Reduction of Biological Contamination on Flight 
Hardware 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): none 

As space flight missions venture into planetary atmospheres and onto surfaces, 
NASA is committed to implementation of its planetary protection policy and 
regulations.  There is a need to support projects in all mission phases from 
design to close-out.  One of the great challenges is to develop or find the 
technologies that will make compliance with planetary protection policy routine 
and affordable.  Planetary protection is directed to 1) the control of 
terrestrial microbial contamination associated with robotic space vehicles 
intended to land, orbit, flyby, or otherwise be in the vicinity of 
extraterrestrial solar system bodies, and 2) the control of contamination of the 
Earth by extraterrestrial solar system material collected and returned by such 
missions.  Implementation of these requirements will ensure that biological 
safeguards to maintain extraterrestrial bodies as biological preserves for 
scientific investigations are being followed in NASA's space program.  To 
fulfill its commitment, NASA seeks technologies that will support its needs in 
the area of cleaning, cleaning validation, maintenance of biologically clean 
work areas, encapsulation and containerization, and archival preservation of 
organic and inorganic samples.  Examples of such technologies include but are 
not limited to: 

- Low temperature, non-corrosive sterilization techniques (room temperature 
and below.) 
- Non-abrasive cleaning techniques for narrow aperture occluded areas. 
- Ultra clean assembly processes for non-assembly line (unique and/or limited 
production) hardware. 
- Direct and rapid in situ monitoring of particles and biological contamination 
on surfaces with various shape, finish, electrical conductivity, etc. 
- Rapid cleaning validation methods with high sensitivity for the major classes 
of biological molecules: proteins, amino acid, DNA/RNA, lipids, polysaccharides. 
- Containerization and encapsulation of samples to be returned to Earth, 
including innovative mechanisms for isolation, sealing, and leak detection. 



8.5 CROSS ENTERPRISE

In addition to the above research subtopics specific to each Enterprise, this 
section captures critical technologies that may support multiple Strategic 
Enterprises.  Cross Enterprise topics reflect the current agency management 
structure for these Cross Enterprise technologies.




20 ADVANCED POWER AND ONBOARD PROPULSION	
20.01 Energy Conversion and Storage and Power Control	
20.02 In-Space Propulsion	
21 BREAKTHROUGH SENSORS AND INSTRUMENT COMPONENT TECHNOLOGY	
21.01 Nano/Quantum Devices	
21.02 Integrated Photonic and Micro-Optic Devices	
21.03 Advanced Photon Detectors	
22 DISTRIBUTED SPACECRAFT	
22.01 Telecommunications and Data Management for Formation Flying	
22.02 Formation Control	
23 HIGH RATE DATA DELIVERY	
23.01 High Performance Communication Technologies for Interplanetary Missions
24 THINKING SPACE SYSTEMS	
24.01 Automated Reasoning for Autonomous Systems	
24.02 Human-Centered Computing	
25 MICRO/NANO SCIENCECRAFT	
25.01 Multifunctional Structure and Sensor Systems	
25.02 Nanotube Materials and Structures for Spacecraft and Nanobiotechnology 
Applications	
26 NEXT GENERATION INFRASTRUCTURE	
26.01 Life-Cycle Integration, Validation, and Distributed Collaboration 
Technologies	
27 SURFACE SYSTEMS	
27.01 Sensor Webs and Robotic Outposts	
28 ULTRALIGHT STRUCTURES AND SPACE OBSERVATORIES	
28.01 Ultra-Light Structures and Materials	
28.02 Adaptive Optical Structural Systems	
28.03 Electro-Static Control and Measurement Technologies	
29 ATMOSPHERIC AND IN-SPACE SYSTEMS	
29.01 Automated Rendezvous and Docking	


20 Advanced Power and Onboard Propulsion 

The Advanced Power and On-Board Propulsion (APOBP) Cross Enterprise seeks to 
provide dramatic reductions in the mass, volume, and cost for spacecraft power 
generation, power management, energy storage, thermal management, and propulsion 
systems through breakthroughs in several space power and on-board propulsion 
technologies.  These technology breakthroughs will enable deep space science 
missions with greatly reduced trip times, increased capability and longer 
planetary encounters; enable human exploration with short trip times and self-
sustaining systems; greatly enhance more ambitious and lower cost earth science 
missions; and enable revolutionary concepts such as virtual spacecraft operating 
as diverse constellations.  Technologies are sought that will extend the 
capability, to travel farther faster, and enable longer planetary encounters; 
improve power generation (solar and nuclear) and energy storage (various battery 
technologies and flywheel energy storage; improve on-board propulsion, including 
chemical, ion, and ACS propulsion systems, with an emphasis on Micro-Newton 
thrusters.  

20.01 Energy Conversion and Storage and Power Control 
Lead Center: GRC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Innovative concepts utilizing advanced technology are solicited in the areas of 
energy conversion, storage, power electronics, and power control.  Power levels 
of interest range from tens of milliwatts to many kilowatts.  NASA programs 
require energy systems with high energy density, cycle life, and reliability and 
reduce overall costs (including operations).  Advances are sought in the 
following areas: 

Static and Dynamic Energy Conversion 
- Photovoltaic technology: (cell efficiencies > 30 percent, array up to 1000 
W/kg and 400 W/m2), rigid arrays, thin film arrays, concentrators, radiation 
resistance, low temperature/low intensity, high temperature/ high intensity 
operation.  
- Thermal-to-electric conversion: Radioisotope Heater Units (RHUs) or General 
Purpose Heat Source (GPHS) to electricity (tens of milliwatts to hundreds of 
watts with efficiencies > 20 percent), and advances in AMTEC, 
thermophotovoltaics, thermoelectrics, Stirling, small lightweight heat reaction 
systems, and microfabricated power systems.  

Energy Storage 
- Primary batteries: > 600 Wh/kg, > 1200 Wh/l, operation-100 C with > 30 
percent specific energy.  
- Secondary battery (lander): > 500 Wh/kg, > 1000 Wh/l, > 150 Wh/kg at -100 
C, operation 65 C.  
- Secondary battery (LEO): > 200 Wh/kg, > 30,000 cycles @ 40 percent.  
- Li/Li-polymer battery: > 200 Wh/kg, low/wide-temperature operation.  
- Distributed micro to milliwatt power sources integrated with 
microelectronics operation -100 C to +100 C, long cycle life.  
- Conformable batteries to fit in under-utilitied areas of spacecraft.  
- Regenerative fuel cell system with > 50 percent round trip efficiency, > 
500 Wh/kg, > 1000 Wh/l, and > 20,000 hours of life.  
- Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) URFC Electrodes: > 40 percent round trip 
efficiency.  
- Fuel Cell, Electrolyzer, URFC PEM Membranes < 10 mA/cm2 cross diffusion at 
80 C, 400 psi, improve electrical efficiency through operation at 120 C, improve 
conductivity to > 0.1/ohm-cm).  
- Fuel Cell, Elecrolyzer, URFC Stacks: reduce weight > 1500 cm2 active 
area/kg of stack weight at > 400 psi, improve efficiency and power density > 
0.59 V/cell at > 4.2 A/cm2.  
- High specific energy density flywheels or ultracapacitors.  
- Flywheel energy storage or components (50-1000 Wh, 50-1500 W) improved 
specific energy, efficiency, cycle life, and/or cost.  Dual function 
power/attitude control systems using flywheel elements for power storage and 
attitude control over a wide power range: development and demonstration of 
control laws.  

Power Electronics and Control 
- Materials, surfaces, and components that are durable for atomic oxygen, soft 
X-ray, electron, proton, and ultraviolet radiation and thermal cycling 
environments, lightweight electromagnetic interference shielding, and high-
performance, environmentally durable radiators.  
- Advanced electronic materials, devices and circuits including transformers, 
transistors, integrated circuits, capacitors, ultra capacitors, electro-optical 
devices, micro electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), sensors, low loss magnetic 
cores, motor drives, electrical actuation.  
- Thermal control integral to electrical devices capability of > 100 W/cm2 
heat flux.  
- Advanced electronic packaging technologies with reduced volume and mass 
capable of high-temperature, low-temperature (cryogenic), or wide-temperature 
operation, radiation resistance, and/or electromagnetic shielding with thermal 
control.
- Advanced control technologies including fault detection, isolation, and system 
reconfiguration, including "smart components," built-in test, health management, 
and power-line or wireless communication.  
- Modular, integrated control building blocks which drastically reduce system 
size, mass, and recurring costs using advanced power packaging and flexible, 
reusable architectures based on monolithic, mixed mode application-specific 
integrated circuits, and/or field programmable gate arrays.  

20.02 In-Space Propulsion 
Lead Center: GRC  
Participating Center(s): GSFC, JPL, JSC 

In-space propulsion is a critical technology area for Space Science, Earth 
Science, and HEDS missions.  In-space propulsion functions include orbit 
insertion, orbit maintenance, constellation maintenance, precision positioning, 
in-space maneuvering, de-orbit, vehicle reaction control, planetary injection, 
and planetary descent/ascent.  The mass and volume of spacecraft are usually 
dominated by the propulsion system, limiting mission capabilities.  Innovations 
are needed in chemical and electric in-space propulsion technologies to reduce 
the mass, volume, and cost of propulsion systems, while increasing their 
capability, reliability, and lifetime.  

Innovations are sought in electrostatic (ion and Hall) and electromagnetic 
(pulsed plasma thrusters) technologies for unmanned Earth-space and planetary 
transportation applications.  Technologies are sought that increase efficiency, 
increase lifetime, reduce mass, and reduce system complexity.  

High-power (> 100 kW) electric propulsion technologies are needed for HEDS and 
space solar power applications.  Innovations in power processing are also 
sought.  

High-performance (specific impulse > 250 sec) monopropellant technologies are 
sought for small satellite orbit insertion and on-orbit maneuvers.  Of 
particular interest are ignition technologies, both catalytic and non-catalytic, 
for high-temperature monopropellants.  High-performance bipropellant 
technologies (specific impulse > 350 sec) are of high interest for planetary 
propulsion applications.  

Propulsion technologies applicable to spacecraft less than 40 kg are of high 
interest to Space Science and Earth Science missions.  These propulsion 
technologies should emphasize system simplicity, low power requirements, minimal 
mass, and leverage the unique nature of microscale devices.  

For all of the electric, chemical, and micro propulsion systems described, there 
is a need for propellant management components that reduce total propulsion 
system mass and volume by a factor of two or better, while maintaining or 
improving reliability of existing components.  

Technologies are sought that will significantly increase capabilities and reduce 
costs for Earth science platforms, as well as enabling new missions with 
revolutionary concepts.  Propulsion functions for Earth science missions include 
orbit insertion, orbit maintenance, constellation maintenance, precision 
positioning, and de-orbit.  Of particular interest are propulsion technologies 
for nano-spacecraft (< 20 kg) that emphasize system simplicity, low power 
requirements, and minimal mass.  These include propulsion technologies that 
provide high-precision (impulse bit< 100 mN-s) station keeping and attitude 
control; high-performance, high-density, low-freezing point monopropellant 
technologies; and high-efficiency electric propulsion technologies for small, 
power-limited spacecraft.  

Deep space missions have certain unique propulsion requirements, compared to 
those for earth-orbital missions, such as very high specific impulse, longer 
service life and higher reliability requirements, stricter mass and volume 
constraints, very fine pointing and positioning demands, and capability to 
operate in more extreme thermal and radiation environments.  Innovative 
approaches to meeting these requirements are sought.  Particular technologies of 
interest include: lightweight 5-20 lbf-class bipropellant rocket engines, 
lightweight propulsion system components, low freezing point propellants, 
thrusters with a combination of very low impulse bits and high thrust-to-power 
ratios, and high reliability micropropulsion (particularly MEMS) technologies.  

Innovations in small chemical propulsion are needed for spacecraft systems used 
for in-space transfer, in-space maneuvering, and ascent/descent missions.  Other 
mission applications include reaction control systems for reusable launch 
vehicles.  Systems that use non-toxic bipropellants are of primary interest, but 
advances in conventional hypergolic propellants are also sought (specific 
impulse > 325 s).  Figures of merit also include reduced cost, longer life, 
improved maintainability, and higher reliability.  System/component technologies 
of interest include: materials compatible with high-temperature, oxidizing and 
reactive environments; components for fluid isolation, pressure/mass flow 
regulation, relief quick disconnect, and flow control; techniques for metering, 
injection, and ignition of fluids in combustion devices; and gaseous storage and 
pressurization systems.  

21 Breakthrough Sensors and Instrument Component Technology 

The Breakthrough Sensors & Instrument Component Technology (BSICT) thrust 
develops advanced detectors, sources, and components that enable a wide array of 
sensing capabilities for NASA.  Sensors and instruments are the primary payloads 
for NASA's unmanned missions, and are key elements for human missions.  Cameras 
that image the universe, radar systems that probe the earth and seas, sensors 
that monitor the environment inside crewed spacecraft are examples of the reach 
of sensor technology.  Through the use of advanced micro- and nano-
technologies, the BSICT thrust is creating detection capabilities that offer 
orders of magnitude improvement in sensitivity, coverage, and speed while also 
greatly reducing mass, power, and cost.  NASA seeks new observation capabilities 
for astrophysics, space physics, planetary and Earth science remote sensing and 
in situ sampling.  The objective is increased sensitivity while achieving 
significant reductions in mass and overall mission costs.  Applications range 
from new sensing techniques using distributed spacecraft to bio-sensors for 
astrobiology missions.  Accordingly, this topic seeks the development of new 
detector technologies based on fundamentally new measurement principles and 
techniques, new materials, and new architectures.  Expanded use of different 
spectral regions including high energy is also under consideration for future 
missions.  

21.01 Nano/Quantum Devices 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): none 

This subtopic seeks new or revolutionary developments in nano/quantum device 
technology for NASA applications.  Nanostructure science and technology is a 
broad and interdisciplinary area of research and development activity that has 
been growing explosively in the past few years.  It has the potential for 
revolutionizing the ways in which materials and devices are created and the 
range and nature of functionalities that can be accessed.  Nanodevices or 
devices based on quantum effects have the potential for higher performance at 
lower volume, weight, and power consumption.  

Nano/quantum device technologies in the following areas are solicited: 

- Innovative synthesis and assembly techniques of nanostructured materials for 
device applications, including semiconductor nanostructures, metallic/magnetic 
nanostructures, and carbon nanotubes.  
- Innovative growth and formation techniques of semiconductor quantum dots with 
greater uniformity of size, controllable achievement of higher quantum dot 
density, and closer dot-to-dot interaction range.  
- Modeling, simulation and demonstration of innovative sensor concepts based on 
development of novel applications of nanotechnology and quantum mechanics.  
- Innovative nanoscale functional device building blocks based on single 
electron charging.  Innovative nanodevices for sensor applications.  
- Nanomagnetic devices.  
- Molecular electronics.  

21.02 Integrated Photonic and Micro-Optic Devices 
Lead Center: MSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

New and innovative approaches to the design, fabrication, and application of 
optical devices are needed to fully exploit the ability of photonics to provide 
size, weight, and cost reduction in optical systems, instruments, and 
components.  Areas of interest include: 

- Microlithography, micromachining, and microfabrication approaches to the 
development of micro-optic devices, with special emphasis on applications using 
direct write electron beam-lithography or photolithography fabrication 
techniques.  
- Active optical elements such as liquid crystal spatial light modulators, 
electro-optic modulators, acousto-optic modulators, piezo-electric modulators, 
and other modulation techniques.  
- Techniques for the fabrication of large aperture (> 10 cm) phase gratings 
possessing micron-sized surface features.  
- Software design tools for use in developing computer-generated holograms, 
phase gratings, diffractive optics, and sub-wavelength structures.  
- Generalized design software for scalar and/or vector-based assessment and 
analysis of wavefront propagation through diffractive and sub-wavelength 
structures.  
- Methods of dual-mode integration between electronic circuits and optical 
circuits.  
- Non-linear optics for use in integrated optical circuits, systems, detectors, 
and devices.  
- Optical circuits with integrated sources, waveguides, directional couplers, 
modulators, and detectors.  
- Design and fabrication of diffractive and integrated optic devices for 
broadband applications.  
- Micro-optic fabrication techniques for the production of high aspect ratio 
(> 3:1), sub-micron surface structures.  
- Wavelength division multiplexing techniques for handling high bandwidth 
optical signals using integrated optical circuits.  
- Large area (> 2 cm squared) blazed diffractive optical elements and 
gratings deposited on curved surfaces with optical power for use in 
miniaturizing optical systems.  

21.03 Advanced Photon Detectors 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

In support of ongoing and future scientific missions, NASA is constantly 
pursuing advances in detector technologies and technologies closely related 
which advance detector performance.  NASA missions require a wide range of focal 
plane detectors which operate from room temperature (300 K) to less than 0.1 K.  
The focal plane may have as few as a single detecting element to over 10 million 
elements (a large format CCD, for example).  Detector electronics can be as 
simple as a single JFET source follower or as complex as a custom multi-million 
cell readout integrated circuit.  The ultimate goal is to deliver the absolute 
highest quality science data possible with minimal cost.  To achieve this goal, 
NASA is looking for improvements in a wide range of detector technologies 
spanning the electromagnetic spectrum from gamma rays to the very far infrared.  
This may include new detector materials or novel approaches to conventional 
materials.  Specific sensor technologies that are of particular interest are: 

- Large format UV, visible and IR detector arrays including: Solar blind UV 
detectors such as GaN, front and backside illuminated CCD's in excess of 50 mega 
pixels with improved quantum efficiency and read noise, silicon strip detectors, 
active pixel, polarization sensitive detector arrays.  
- Very large format arrays of InGaAs, InSb, HgCdTe, extrinsic silicon, GaAs 
QWIPS.  
- Monolithic multicolor detector arrays (such as detector arrays having 
different spectral response at different material depths or other methods of 
energy resolution on chip.) 
- Advanced IR and visible detectors including: IR detector arrays operating at 
warmer temperatures, uncooled IR detectors arrays, radiation hard visible and IR 
detectors.  
- Develop photon counting detectors for far infrared and sub-millimeter 
radiation using super conducting and quantum dot technology with NEP < 10-20 
W/vHz along with fast readout schemes and/or multiplexers to read our arrays as 
large as 1000 pixels.  
- Low and high temperature Super conducting detectors (tunnel junction and 
transition edge, for example) and readout electronics.  

To further improve the detector system performance NASA is also seeking advances 
in supporting technologies.  Some examples of these technology areas are: 

- New and innovative detector/readout electronics hybridization for very large 
format focal planes.  
- New and improved electronics for cryogenic temperatures (LN2 and LHe) such as 
CMOS and GaAs readouts, ASICs, low noise FETs, SQUIDS.  
- Extremely small area very high value (greater than 100 mega ohms) low noise, 
low capacitance resistors for detector loads.  
- New and novel blackbody sources for on-board real time detector calibration.  
- Detector thermal isolation improvements to reduce head loads to or from the 
focal plane.  

22 Distributed Spacecraft 

Virtual platforms and distributed spacecraft control technologies will 
revolutionize the manner in which Earth and Space Science missions are 
conceptualized, planned, designed, and implemented.  This Cross Enterprise 
includes concepts, approaches, and strategies that enable higher levels of 
interaction between vehicles, cooperation between vehicles, and the ability to 
function with a common system wide capability.  Distributed networks of 
individual vehicles will replace large complex observatories.  They will operate 
under virtual infrastructures capable of responding to changing needs and 
conditions and evolving over time to introduce new capability and technology.  
Extensive co-observing campaigns, coordinated multi-point observing programs, 
significant improvements in space-based interferometry, and entirely new 
approaches to conducting Earth and Space Science will be achievable while 
reducing the complexities, costs, and schedule requirements associated with 
traditional mission concepts.  This topic focuses on the guidance, navigation 
and control aspects of multiple distributed assets or space vehicles, including 
architectures, methodologies, and hardware components.  Distributed networks 
include all types of multiple cooperating space vehicles, e.g., balloons, 
instruments and detectors, mirrors and satellites.  Technologies are sought that 
enable coordinated constellations of spacecraft or other remote platforms that 
act as a single mission spacecraft for coordinated co-registered earth or 
planetary observations, act as single instrument (interferometry or distributed 
optical systems) or perform in situ coordinated measurements; Advanced 
autonomous guidance, navigation and control architectures; Formation cquisition, 
initialization and maintenance, fault detection and recovery; Satellite cross-
link for communication.  

22.01 Telecommunications and Data Management for Formation Flying 
Lead Center: GSFC  
Participating Center(s): none 

Novel concepts and enabling technologies for the end-to-end interspacecraft 
communications architecture for multiple satellite formations with particular 
interest in the fusion of intelligent command, control, and navigation 
strategies with the communications architecture while addressing special issues 
such as protocols, robustness, routing, connectivity, latency, self-
jamming/interference, and signal structure.  Technologies enabling onboard 
distributed real-time computing and data management, sharing and storage 
concepts for numerous distributed vehicles over various separation distances and 
data rates (extreme case requiring Gbps) are also of interest.  Innovations are 
expected to offer significant improvements in performance, weight, power 
efficiency, reliability and/or cost.  Products are sought in the following 
areas: 

- Latency-tolerant data communication protocols and enhanced Asynchronous 
Transfer Mode (ATM) and related network technologies for inter-spacecraft 
communication.  
- Internet technologies to provide information among spacecraft in a formation 
and links to the ground for the end users.  Innovative approaches to software 
simulation tools for upper atmospheric and inter-spacecraft interference and 
disturbances.  
- Fault tolerant protocols that allow for data transfer recovery without a 
complete resend of the data.  
- Software/hardware technologies to enhance configuration management, 
performance monitoring, fault isolation and security of data communications 
networks involving inter-satellite links.  
- Network problem detection tools that help in fault detection and isolation.  
- Low cost, low-weight, and low-power cross link transceivers with wide scan 
angles (+/- 60 degrees) for inter-spacecraft communications.  
- Power and bandwidth efficient modems, combined modulation and coding schemes 
and digital transmission techniques for application in NASA space-based inter-
spacecraft communication links.  Innovative approaches to reduce size, mass, 
power and cost; single chip integration of multiple functions; use of digital 
technologies to enable multi-Gigabit/second throughputs; use of radiation hard 
components to support on-orbit operation.  
- Hardware and software that support navigation methods for formation or 
constellation operations in Earth orbit based on the use of GPS and other RF 
signals.  

22.02 Formation Control 
Lead Center: GSFC 
Participating Center(s): JPL 

This subtopic calls for novel approaches to autonomous control of distributed 
spacecraft and the management of large fleets flying in formations. Techniques 
should include methods for initial formation acquisition, self-reorganization, 
collision avoidance, re-configurable control laws, algorithms for autonomous 
formation reconfigurations and maneuvers.  Also of particular interest are fault 
detection and recovery techniques in a formation environment. Numerous future 
NASA missions include flying distributed non-homogeneous spacecraft for both 
Earth and Space Science applications. 

Constellations such as large sparse antennas formed by a collection of miniature 
autonomous spacecraft containing the basic antenna elements arranged in an 
optimal geometric pattern represent an emerging novel approach to space-borne 
antenna design. In addition to the dynamic behavior of each individual 
spacecraft, the collective behavior of all the spacecraft in the formation will 
determine the quality and the magnitude of the science return. 

The physical realization and operation of distributed spacecraft require new 
modeling techniques, new methodologies in autonomous, formation spacecraft 
control, configuration optimization, and development of high precision formation 
metrology and actuation systems. Techniques are needed to enable precision 
station keeping from coarse requirements (relative position control of any two 
spacecraft to less than a cm, and relative attitude of 1 arcmin over a large 
range of separation of a few meters to tens of kilometers) to fine requirements 
(nanometer relative position control, and relative attitude of .01 
illiarcsecond) over a large range of separations of a few meters to tens of 
kilometers. In order to implement precision synchronized motions, high precision 
actuators are critical for both continuous and discrete control of spacecraft. 

Tethered formation flying is another concept being considered for distributed 
sensing, co-observation platforms and interferometric instrumentation. 
Innovative concepts for distributed modeling and control for the deployment, 
retrieval, reconfiguration, tethered station keeping as well as techniques for 
tethered damping management are solicited. 

Distributed spacecraft control systems also enable science investigations needed 
for the understanding of the total Earth system and the effects of natural and 
human-induced changes on the global environment. Some representative mission 
scenarios include maintaining a specified satellite formation geometry at key 
points in the trajectory, maintaining the relative motion and collective 
pointing among co-orbiting spacecraft throughout the orbit, or maintaining 
relative positioning and attitude for targeting points on the Earth or capturing 
reflected angles off the Earth's surface or atmosphere. Distributed spacecraft 
concepts of collective pointing (pointing the formation at a particular target) 
or coordinated pointing (pointing the formation to collect related data from 
different selected angles) are critical to many of these mission scenarios.

To support near-Earth observing missions and operations, and human exploration 
of space, distributed spacecraft capabilities must include navigation methods 
for formation or constellation proximity operations in Earth orbit based use of 
a "watch dog" satellite are of interest. The "watch dog" surveys targets of 
availability for a formation and notifies the fleet which targets are visible 
for observing, or performs other auxiliary functions for the fleet. 

Distributed Spacecraft control systems should utilize, but are not limited to, 
expert systems, fuzzy logic, genetic algorithms, neural networks, discrete-event 
system methods, etc., to provide the formation with an onboard intelligence 
capable of: identifying and selecting science targets of opportunity while 
resolving mission and activity constraints; autonomously monitoring spacecraft 
functions and environmental conditions, assessing health status, and optimizing 
system performance through in-flight identification, fault detection, and 
stabilization; optimization of assets to target newly identified concerns or 
events; and autonomous fleet reconfiguration on using GPS and other RF signals. 
Concepts should consider the limited resources onboard - reduced memory and 
processing power when compared with ground systems.

23 High Rate Data Delivery 

The future vision of this Cross Enterprise sees new communication and 
information technology breakthroughs enabling high rate data delivery, thereby 
establishing our virtual presence throughout our solar system.  To achieve this 
will require the integration of advanced communications, networks and 
information technologies.  The integration of these technologies, with high data 
rates, will enable a telepresence for near-earth and deep space scientific 
missions, and for human and robotic exploration.  The transmission of data at 
high rates permits an increasingly rapid conversion of information to knowledge, 
and knowledge to new discoveries.  Global interoperability among space-based 
assets and terrestrial telecommunications networks will diminish the gap between 
the sensors and the scientist.  Information technology breakthroughs will enable 
the management of massive, diverse, multi-terabyte data sets needed to produce 
high-level information products.  Technologies are sought that enable affordable 
virtual presence throughout the solar system; minimize the impact of 
communications subsystems on future spacecraft; enable cost-effective 
information extraction and compression; reduce cost through low cost lightweight 
high data rate system and low mass components; enable deep space and near earth 
optical communications; enable in situ communications for surface exploration; 
and improve communications components for Deep Space Communications and enable 
high rate communications among distributed information elements.  

23.01 High Performance Communication Technologies for Interplanetary Missions 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): none 

All NASA missions rely on the transmission of data for their successful 
completion.  Future NASA missions require high data rates (greater than multi-
Gbps) for backbone communications, internetworking among spacecraft 
constellations and direct data delivery to ground networks and users via the 
internet.  

Innovative communications technologies are sought at the device, subsystem and 
system level in such areas as onboard data collection, processing and storage; 
microwave, millimeter wave and optical communications; digital processing, 
modulation and coding; communications architectures, and networks and system 
protocols.  High performance and highly robust communication systems are needed 
for multi-year science data return from Earth orbit and Solar System bodies like 
the Mars telecommunications infrastructure.  Also, satellite communications with 
small body and planetary landers and in situ rovers and sensors are of growing 
interest.  Topics of interest include: 

- System and component level optical and microwave technologies for highly 
efficient laser transmitters and modulation schemes for deep space (Q-switched 
solid-state) sources with > 1 W of average output power.  
- Efficient, very low-thermal expansion, lightweight, multi-channel telescopes 
systems with 10-30 cm in aperture size where implementation of stray-light 
control and sunlight mitigation effects are of particular interest (an example 
is a terminal at Neptune communicating with earth while the Sun is in the 
background for majority of the time.) 
- Advanced technologies for sub-micro-radian level pointing of a laser beam at 
the Earth including high-bandwidth sensor (e.g., micro-g level gyro) feedback, 
and innovative acquisition and tracking algorithms.  
- Focal plane array detectors incorporating on-chip processing for window 
control and features such as pixel gain/offset correction window, 
background/pattern noise calibration, bright spot location for initial 
acquisition, pixel summation mode, low power, low noise, high tracking 
bandwidth, multi-windowing, full random access, high QE, and electronic shutter.  
- Modulation and coding techniques and network designs for deep-space 
communications that reduce cost, input power, mass, bandwidth requirements and 
complexity.  
- For ground receivers, inexpensive, very large (> 10 m) innovative telescope 
designs.  Also high gain, large area (> 3 mm diameter) avalanche photodiode 
detectors (APDs) with > 200 MHz bandwidth, > 40 percent QE at 1064 nm and very 
low noise (k factor.) 
- Ultra-small, low cost, low power, deep-space RF transponders and components, 
including low voltage, high-efficiency integrated circuits such as microwave 
monolithic integrated circuits (MMICs) and MMIC filters.  
- Signal processing circuits for receivers that provide carrier tracking, 
command and ranging capabilities.  
- Low voltage, multi-function MMIC designs with integrated filters to provide 
low-noise down-conversion, automatic gain-control, up-conversion, and ransceiver 
functions at Ka-band (32 GHz.) 
- MMIC modulators to provide large linear phase modulation (above 2.5 radians), 
and high-data rate BPSK/QPSK modulation at Ka-band.  
- Miniature, ultra-stable and voltage-controlled oscillators for deep space 
communications and GPS applications.  
- Miniature, low-loss X-band (8.4 GHz) and Ka-band switches and diplexers.  
- Miniature, X-or Ka-band high-efficiency power amplifiers and RF power devices, 
transmitters with output power levels ranging from 3 watts to 20 watts, and both 
innovative solid-state as well as thermionic devices that can survive the space 
environment with mean-time-to-failure of 10 years or more.  
- MMICs supporting miniature, high-efficiency power amplifiers at Ka-band 
(primary focus) and X-band (secondary focus) such as gain blocks, multi-bit 
digital phase shifters and power cells.  
- Support elements like low-loss, miniaturized isolators, high-efficiency 
integrated DC-DC power converters, and miniaturized power dividers and 
combiners.  
- Low mass, high-gain, high-efficiency antennas typically with diameters less 
than 2 meters, integral with spacecraft surfaces, or that can be reliably stowed 
in low volumes.  

24 Thinking Space Systems 

The Thinking Systems Cross Enterprise has the goal of enabling better, faster, 
cheaper, more reliable space missions by extending the scope of decisions and 
actions that can be done under computer control.  The Cross Enterprise enables 
unmanned missions to accomplish more by making better autonomous decisions, and 
better interpretation of the science data that is brought back.  It enables 
manned missions to be cheaper and safer by providing more sophisticated 
interactions between astronaut and machines.  Finally, it enables ground 
operations to be cheaper and faster, by allowing a reduced ground operations 
team to send more complex high-level instructions.  In all cases, the Cross 
Enterprise will support both earth orbit and deep space missions.  The Cross 
Enterprise also provides an infrastructure in model-based representation and 
reasoning, software validation and verification, and human-centered computing 
that will support a wide range of NASA programs.  Technologies are sought that 
enable curious, self-reliant, self-commanding space systems that plan and 
conduct measurements based on current or historical observations or inputs; 
recognize desired phenomenon and concentrate observations or activities 
accordingly monitor and maintain desired status/configuration for long periods 
of time without frequent communication with ground.  

24.01 Automated Reasoning for Autonomous Systems 
Lead Center: ARC  
Participating Center(s): GSFC, JPL 

NASA is planning to fill space with robotic explorers, carrying our intelligence 
and our curiosity outward in ways never before possible.  To survive decades of 
operation, these remote agents need to be smart, adaptable, curious, wary, and 
self-reliant in harsh and unpredictable environments.  NASA is soliciting 
research in automated reasoning for autonomous systems that will enable the 
design, construction and operation of a new generation of remote agents that 
perform progressively more exploration at much lower cost than traditional 
approaches.  

NASA also needs automated reasoning to improve its operations closer to home.  
For instance, software for monitoring shuttle and space station systems and 
diagnosing faults when they occur or software agents for processing, classifying 
and archiving the mountains of data from earth orbiting satellites.  Specific 
areas of interest for automated reasoning include the following: 

Agent Architectures 
- Autonomy architectures that support plug and play of automated reasoning 
components.  
- Architectures for homogeneous and heterogeneous distributed systems of 
agents.  
- Capabilities related to Autonomous Performance.  
- Planning and scheduling systems that support planning concurrent with 
execution, plan optimization, resource management and/or distributed plan 
creation capabilities.  
- Model-based and statistical methods for monitoring, command confirmation, 
fault isolation, and diagnosis from sensor information.  
- Methods for robust recovery & repair.  
- Algorithms for real-time deduction and search.  
- Novel environment sensing or mapping capabilities.  
- Machine learning and adaptive control technologies.  
- Methods for precisely and dynamically adjusting the level of human control.  

Capabilities Related to Design 
- Declarative specification of software and hardware behaviors, collaborative 
environments for large scale model building.  
- Methods for code synthesis and controller generation from declarative 
specifications.  
- Automated generation of test sequences from component models and analytic 
verification methods, including model checking and theorem proving.  
- Methods for modeling, code synthesis, simulation, testing and validation, as 
above, that operate from hybrid discrete/continuous models.  

24.02 Human-Centered Computing 
Lead Center: ARC  
Participating Center(s): JSC 

NASA is planning to use human explorers, highly trained with scientific and 
technical skills, to explore our solar system in ways never before possible. To 
survive years of living and working in space, these astronauts need to be 
outfitted with life support, data gathering, and spacecraft tools that will 
enable them to be productive and thrive in harsh and unpredictable environments.  
Not the least of these astronauts' concerns will be coping with breakdowns and 
uncertainties in operating the increasingly complex technologies of spacecraft, 
rovers, and habitats, which will require ongoing monitoring, control, diagnosis, 
and repair.  

To achieve NASA's ambitious exploration goals, researchers must develop robust 
control systems and exploration tools that can be understood by people, easily 
learned, maintained, and directed.  For example, life support systems for either 
spacecraft or habitat systems must aid people in diagnosis and repair.  
Operations assistants, integrated into just-in-time training systems, will be 
necessary to help people understand the state of the system and help them 
correct errant procedures.  The design of computer systems necessarily must take 
into account not only how people will "interface" with the systems, but 
fundamental aspects of human perceptual-motor coordination, cognitive 
operations, and group dynamics.  Human-centered computing focuses on the "delta" 
- what is the difference between the best computer systems and people? What are 
the particular contributions of humans and machines? How can we design machines 
and operational procedures to complement each other? 

Human-centered computing is a design approach that integrates computational 
systems with human performance and capabilities, such that the total system 
amplifies, corrects, and leverages the capabilities of both people and 
machines.  The architectural requirements of autonomous systems are required, 
plus fundamental theories of human perceptual, cognitive, and social systems 
that anticipate the context and contribution of human behavior in which 
technologies are utilized and maintained.  Beyond this, the harsh realities of 
working in space environments must be thoroughly understood, so tools such as 
electronic notebooks, alarm systems, and scheduling systems are adapted to the 
living and work environment of a space habitat or planetary surface rover.  To 
advance along these lines, proposals are sought in the following areas: 

Perceptual Performance Enhancers 
- Visualization tools combining "virtual reality" projection with actual objects 
in the environment, conveying information about object identity, part 
relationships, and assembly or operational procedures.  
- "Cognitive prostheses" that qualitatively change the capabilities of human 
perception, pattern analysis, scientific domain modeling, reasoning, and 
collaborative activity.  Such tools could incorporate any of a variety of 
modeling techniques such as knowledge-based systems and neural networks, and fit 
tool operations to ongoing human physical interaction, judgment, and 
collaborative activity.  
- Robust, Mixed-Initiative Information Systems.  
- Advanced AI systems/architectures for mixed-initiative system planning, 
monitoring, and control, with provision for crew oversight.  
- Agent-based tools for information gathering, reminding, and alerting; job 
performance aids that provide cognitive assistance in the context of daily 
activities.  

Collaborative, Knowledge Amplifiers for Scientists and Engineers 
- Information technology enabling comprehensive sharing of project-related 
information and data, which supports intelligent organization, access, and 
presentation of the information.  
- "Knowledge management" tools that relate technical models of human knowledge 
to: a) nonverbal concepts and perceptual skills; b) the daily activities of 
workers, including especially how databases are actually used in practice; c) 
informal on-the-job learning; and d) the career trajectories of novices, 
experts, and retiring employees.  
- Software systems that provide specialized support for collaborative science 
and engineering tasks, including design, data collection, experimentation, 
analysis, and model construction to enable scientists and engineers to 
collaborate as part of distributed project teams at physically separate sites.  

25 Micro/Nano Sciencecraft 

The micro/nano Sciencecraft Cross Enterprise marshals the work of a broad 
spectrum of mechanical and electrical science and engineering disciplines to 
produce an orders-of-magnitude reduction of the size and mass of NASA's 
spacecraft.  Such reductions dramatically lower the size and cost of the launch 
vehicle required for a given mission.  Alternatively, these same technology 
advances would allow a constellation of spacecraft to be launched on a single 
launch vehicle.  In addition, these technology advances will yield such an 
increase of on-board computing capability that high levels of autonomy can be 
used to reduce the cost of operating spacecraft dramatically, thereby permitting 
real-time operations by the science instruments principal investigator and 
leading ultimately to space science that provides the investigator with a 
"virtual presence".  Advances in technology are sought that will yield order of 
magnitude reductions of spacecraft mass and size, enabling large spacecraft 
constellations and/or more frequent flight opportunities for the same cost.  
Technologies are sought that enable a) small, individual, highly capable 
robotic spacecraft and b) capable multiple spacecraft working cooperatively in 
the collection, processing and transmission of science observations.  These 
goals also require small lightweight easily deployed in situ instruments for 
satellite validation and field campaigns; smaller, lighter in weight, more 
resource-efficient, more capable spacecraft "bus" and "payload" components, 
efficiently integrated bus/payload spacecraft designs; high performance data 
compression technology; and low-power high-speed CMOS, rad hard FPGA, MEMS 
technology, fully integrated navigation, and MEMS based fluid handling and 
control for propulsion and thermal control.  

25.01 Multifunctional Structure and Sensor Systems 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): none
 
NASA seeks innovative concepts for multifunctional structure and sensor systems 
to reduce spacecraft size and mass, and to enable lower cost and more capable 
aerospace vehicles, instruments and structures.  A multifunctional system 
combines several functions, which are usually performed by separate subsystems, 
into a single highly integrated system.  Additionally, multifuntional systems 
would enable more effective health monitoring where, in this case, "health 
monitoring" refers to the state of the spacecraft, subsystem or structure.  To 
achieve this will require revolutionary advances over the capabilities of 
traditional spacecraft systems and a broadening of the tool set through the 
introduction of new kinds of design and analysis systems.  Microspacecraft 
systems (as small as 10 kg, using 10 W, or less) of all varieties will enable 
new missions that are currently impractical.  These systems will include, but 
are not limited to, orbiters, landers, atmospheric probes, rovers, penetrators, 
aerobots (balloons), planetary aircraft, subsurface vehicles (ice/soil), and 
submarines.  Also of interest are distributed sensor systems integral with 
structural elements for the monitoring of the state of those elements or for the 
construction of new classes of scientific instruments based upon the unique 
features of the integrated system.  New technologies are needed in the areas of 
integration and packaging of MEMS sensors and actuators with advanced ightweight 
materials for structure and propulsion.  

Potential mission applications for the technology products developed in this 
area include micro/nano-spacecraft, thin-film gossamer spacecraft, adaptive 
large-aperture telescopes, antennas, and airframes.  High-priority technology 
development needs are: 

- Techniques for the structural integration of low-volume electronics packaging 
such as chip-on-structure, chip-on-flex (flexible substrate), and imbedded 
electronics.  
- Concepts for integrating electronics, MEMS, power distribution, energy 
storage, thermal management, and radiation shielding with ultra-lightweight 
composite structures.  
- Multifunctional membranes that incorporate thin-film electronics and MEMS 
sensors, photovoltaic cells, or electrochromic materials.  
- Adaptive and reconfigurable structures that can respond reactively to 
environmental stimuli for self-repair of damage.  
- Avionics, including highly integrated "systems-on-a-chip" technologies 
that integrate areas such as telecommunications, power management, data 
processing and storage, on-chip energy storage, on-chip magnetics or data 
sensors with structure and/or actuators.  
- Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) including: microactuation, navigation 
sensors, health-monitor sensor systems, low power and low-mass on-chip 
communication systems, and micro fluid storage and control systems.  
- Thermal management, including active and passive techniques.  
- Integration of functions such as engineering sensors and science instruments, 
structure, thermal, cabling, propulsion, etc.  
- Technology for integrating three-dimensional VLSI, chip stacking, multi-chip-
module stacking and other advanced packaging techniques with structural elements.  
- Concepts and designs for test and validation of design integrity and 
performance of IP based ASICs, mixed signal ASICs and MEMS.  

25.02 Nanotube Materials and Structures for Spacecraft and Nanobiotechnology 
Applications 
Lead Center: JSC  
Participating Center(s): ARC, JPL 

This subtopic focuses on single-wall carbon nanotube applications and 
nanobiotechnology.  NASA is moving toward smaller, lower mass and energy 
consumption aerospace systems.  For planetary exploration the agency is moving 
toward 1-50 kg size, low cost spacecraft for space physics and earth science 
missions.  Focus should also be on long-duration space missions and habitats.  
The intent is to revolutionize technology and expand functionality to enable new 
science investigations at acceptable costs using the extraordinary properties of 
single-wall carbon nanotubes (CNT).  Unprecedented concepts for biotechnology at 
the nanoscale level using nanomaterials or nanodevices will aid in extending 
long duration human missions in space.  Nanotube technology is expected to play 
a major role in developing future spacecraft and system needs of NASA.  

To achieve these goals, significant advances in structural materials, 
nanoelectronics, data handling and storage, sensor systems and instrumentation 
are required.  CNTs offer extraordinary mechanical and unique electronic 
properties and thus can meet demands in long term structural as well as 
electronics applications.  Structural applications of CNTs could have 
significant impact on lower mass structures for space vehicles.  
Functionalization with molecules may lead to CNT-based sensors.  
Nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) based on CNT, such as actuators; 
accelerometers, motors, etc., can truly lead to a revolution in nanotechnology.  
Also of interest are innovative techniques for bulk production and large scale 
synthesis of exceptionally long and/or aligned or functionalized single-wall 
nanotubes, necessary for such applications as composites.  Other areas of 
interest are the controlled nanotube growth on patterned substrates, control of 
nanotube diameter, helicity and properties, functionalization of nanotubes with 
chemical groups, chemical- gas- bio- sensors, storage of hydrogen, lithium fuel 
cell and battery applications, field display devices, in areas such as high 
strength materials and composites, energy storage, thermal protection, and rapid 
prototyping nanobiotechnology, nanobots (nano-scale robots) to monitor, repair 
or protect the human body in a hostile space environment, nanodevices operating 
at or below the cellular level  to monitor radiation doses in organs, release 
medicinal substances at specified sites or intervals on command or programmed to 
operate independently using internal software, and other novel applications.   
     
26 Next Generation Infrastructure

The Next Generation Infrastructure Cross Enterprise encompasses concepts and 
developments that make an Intelligent Synthesis Environment possible.  This 
cross enterprise develops and implements tools and processes to revolutionize 
engineering practice and science integration in the design, development, and 
execution of NASA's missions.  This technology enables advanced networked 
collaborations of geographically dispersed people and organizations using 
advanced simulation capabilities to define and evaluate the complete life-cycle 
performance of a mission or product, including mission definition, design, 
manufacture, operation and disposal.

Engineering and science tools are sought to provide virtual prototyping, 
synthetic mission environment development and life cycle simulation.  Software 
capabilities are sought to provide intelligent knowledge capture and knowledge 
bases, collaboration technologies, intelligent networking, plug and play 
software architecture advanced and multi-sensory user interfaces.  Moreover, 
technologies are sought that will significantly improve speed and/or accuracy of 
single discipline, deterministic, physics-based, and non-deterministic 
computational models and methods to support more efficient and cost-effective 
design of spacecraft components; improve multidisciplinary analysis and design 
procedures and methods to support the integration of design tools and computer 
architectures for concurrent engineering applications.  Technologies are sought 
that enable the fusion of computationally intelligent algorithms into physics-
based analysis methods, in order to improve accuracy, speed, software reuse, 
parameter sensitivities, user friendliness, and other aspects of the numerical 
computation process.  These computer intelligence methods include the use of 
genetic algorithms, neural networks, fuzzy logic, and other similar 
technologies.  Technologies are sought that enhance the application of virtual 
reality and other related advanced visualization tools to the design process, 
including developments in computer simulation methods that can be used to model 
the manufacturing, assembly, performance, repair, maintenance, and disposal of 
spacecraft products.  Technologies are sought that enable collaboration amongst 
geographically dispersed groups of design engineers and mission scientists.

26.01 Life-Cycle Integration, Validation, and Distributed Collaboration 
Technologies 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): KSC 

The NASA Intelligent Synthesis Environment (ISE) seeks to address all aspects of 
design development and life-cycle management, including the ability to determine 
complete life-cycle requirements and costs early in the design cycle.  There is 
a critical need for modeling, simulation, and asynchronous technologies that 
support integration throughout the entire life-cycle of a mission, project, or 
vehicle (a typical NASA life-cycle is on the order of 30 years).  This 
integrated capability must be supported across diverse geographic, cultural, and 
computational environments and be used not only in the ISE but within other 
organizations as well.  NASA ISE is focused on designing, delivering, 
supporting and commercializing advanced technologies, and collections of 
technologies, that support the advancement of engineering, engineering tools, 
and engineering methodologies.  A goal is the development of tools that support 
the creation, storage, management, and retrieval of information over entire 
program life-cycles.  Tools and technologies are expected to be de-coupled from 
the actual data storage elements to facilitate the separate evolution of various 
technologies.  The architecture involved must support preservation of the data 
as well as operation on the data sets by multiple tools.  

There are many emerging technological concepts that show promise as potential 
ISE technologies.  Examples of some existing concepts, which HAVE NOT been 
incorporated into integrated data life-cycle management are: 1) Intelligent 
Agents (push/portals/information dissemination), 2) Threaded 
Discussions/Community of Interest Sites, 3) Data Mining, 4) Project Management 
Integration, 5) Document Collaboration, 6) Library, 7) Workflow/Status 
Checking, and 8) Information Compartmentalization to reduce information 
overload.  Requirements exist for the following areas of interest: 

- Software system architectures that enable life-cycle simulation systems to 
be assembled quickly and tailored for specific vehicles or missions.  Such 
systems must be compatible with legacy software codes as well as permit the 
insertion of research technology by users.  
- Rapid model assemblers technology that enables components and a knowledge 
base to assist the modeler in providing validated model data suitable for the 
simulation of the entire life-cycle of a product.  
- Advanced rapid life cycle simulation tools.  
- Advanced intelligent systems for knowledge capture of design and the design 
process, and engineering process assessment methodologies.  
- Software systems and products that reduce the effort required for creating 
impressive visualization displays of intermediate simulations is necessary to 
validate the intermediate results.  Such systems must be general enough to 
support the entire life-cycle of NASA's diverse missions and vehicles.  
- Distributed collaboration tools that support the integration of life-cycle 
analysis in both modeling and simulation.  
- New technologies that allow collection, storage, and retrieval of various 
forms of integrated data (graphical, text, photo, email, sound, etc.) associated 
with a process life-cycle (full life-cycle, greater than 30 years).  

27 Surface Systems 

Surface Systems Thrust research enables new exploration missions to planet, 
comet and asteroid surfaces.  It leads to efficient exploration by means of 
autonomous robotic systems, and to the development of technology for safe, self-
sufficient and self-sustaining robotic and human presence beyond Earth.  
Smarter, faster, and more maneuverable rovers and other types of robotic 
vehicles --along with the techniques for surface and subsurface exploration, in 
situ resource utilization and planetary protection -- are key to this Cross 
Enterprise.  Technologies are sought that enable robotic outposts, distributed 
mobile arrays of robotic assets for measurement and communication, robotic 
deployment of permanent science stations on planetary surfaces, and setting up 
habitat and other surface infrastructures for subsequent human missions.  
Technologies are sought that enable scientific sample acquisition, handling and 
packaging, and for high-reliability long-life surface systems capable of 
operating in a wide range of temperatures.  

27.01 Sensor Webs and Robotic Outposts 
Lead Center: JPL  
Participating Center(s): none 

The Sensor Webs and Robotic Outposts subtopic seeks fundamental research 
contributions aimed at new types of surface systems consisting of distributed 
arrays of mobile robots equipped with multiple sensors for in situ measurement 
and communication.  Closely related to the sensor-web concept is that of a 
robotic outpost in which multiple robots are coordinated to deploy and provide a 
permanent presence on the surface of planets and other bodies in the solar 
system.  Examples of a robotic outpost are permanent science stations for long 
duration acquisition of scientific samples; exploratory teams of mobile robots 
to access and explore high-risk areas that have a high scientific payoff; 
robotic work crews for infrastructure deployment and preparation of sites for 
subsequent human missions; and robots for assisting humans in complex surface 
operations.  The initial focus of the long term research is on the technology 
that enables long-duration and permanent presence, including the capability for 
autonomous robotic repair of major components, sub-assemblies and entire surface 
systems, miniaturized in situ resource utilization (ISRU) systems, and ISRU 
fueled surface systems.  Examples of desired technologies are given below.  

- Intelligent system software technologies to enable robotic colony formation 
for collective tasks such as site selection, site preparation, and habitat-
deployment on planetary surfaces as a precursor to human exploration missions.  
- Robotic excavation and tunneling systems.  
- Systems that can repair/replace/reconfigure themselves, with minimal human 
intervention from the ground to respond to unexpected events or multiple mission 
objectives.  
- Robotic systems to enable surface sampling from aerial vehicles.  
- Robotic systems which develop and couple in situ generated propellants with 
new robotic vehicle designs whose mobility is based on these fuels, for both 
science and human exploration.  
- Subsurface and submersible vehicle concepts and designs for deep exploration 
of planetary subsurfaces and ocean formations.  
- High-speed, rough terrain, sensing and processing devices for autonomous 
navigation and science data acquisition.  
- High-accuracy global surface positioning systems.  
- Dexterous pointing, placement, manipulation, and excavation devices and 
processes.  
- Inflatable rover technology.  
- Dynamic simulation of multiple interacting autonomous robotic systems.  
- Technologies for deep drilling and analysis.  

28 Ultralight Structures and Space Observatories 

The Ultra-Lightweight Structures and Space Observatories (ULSSO) thrust develops 
revolutionary technology in structures, materials, and optical systems to enable 
bold new missions of discovery for NASA.  NASA is studying future missions 
requiring very large space observatories.  Long-range plans are aimed at 
detection and characterization of planets in orbit around nearby stars to search 
for the chemical signatures of life.  Achieving this goal will require arrays of 
space telescopes that have 1000x the light collecting area of the largest 
ground-based telescopes in operation today.  Technologies are sought that enable 
very large telescopes for imaging extra-solar planets, studying the formation of 
large-scale structure in the early universe, and continuously monitoring the 
Earth from distant vantage points.  Technologies are sought that enable large 
deployable and inflatable antennas for space-based radio astronomy, high-
bandwidth communications from deep space, and Earth remote sensing with radar 
and radiometers; solar sails for low cost propulsion, station keeping in 
unstable orbits, and precursor interstellar exploration missions; Gossamer 
technology for kilometer-scale membrane spacecraft that weigh less per unit area 
than a sheet of paper.  

28.01 Ultra-Light Structures and Materials 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): JPL, MSFC 

Revolutionary advances in ultra-lightweight structures and materials technology 
are needed to enable a broad range of future NASA missions.  Applications 
include large aperture telescopes and antennas, solar sails and telescope 
sunshields, large solar arrays and solar concentrators, Earth and planetary 
balloons, planetary entry vehicles, and spacecraft operating in extreme 
environments.  Technology breakthroughs in this area will also enable gossamer 
spacecraft, which are very large, ultra-lightweight, highly-integrated systems 
that can packaged into a small volume for launch.  Technologies of specific 
interest are: 

- Large (> 20 m) deployable and inflatable rigidizable booms and trusses.  
- Innovative methods for in-space manufacture and self-assembly of lightweight 
structural elements and membranes.  Membranes that can be made to grow like a 
biological system and that can 'self-heal' is a long-term goal.  
- Thermal protection for hypersonic vehicles.  
- Highly-integrated multifunctional membranes that incorporate electronics, 
MEMS devices, sensors, actuators, power sources, or other spacecraft components 
in thin-film materials.  
- Ultra-lightweight, high-strength membrane materials for solar sails, 
sunshields, inflatables, and balloons.  
Materials should be resistant to ultraviolet radiation, particle radiation, and 
extreme temperatures (lifetime > 10 years).  
- High surface precision thin-film materials and reflective coatings for 
membrane optics.  
- Nano-particle (i.e., organoclays, carbon nanotubes, etc.) containing composite 
materials with substantially higher strength-to-weight ratio or thermal 
conductivity than state-of-the-art composites.  Ideas should not be limited to 
filling polymers with nano-particles, but should include concepts such as 
chemically linking nano-particles together to form molecular 'net-like' 
structures.  Applications include ultra-lightweight structural elements, 
electrically conductive elements, and efficient thermal management devices.  

28.02 Adaptive Optical Structural Systems 
Lead Center: LaRC  
Participating Center(s): GSFC 

Proposals are sought for the development of adaptive systems applicable to 
large, ultra-lightweight structures and apertures.  Adaptive systems are needed 
for measuring and correcting surface figure and wavefront errors for large 
telescopes and antennas, for controlling the dynamics of large flexible 
structures, and for enabling gossamer spacecraft that can reconfigure themselves 
in response to changing environmental conditions or mission phases.  
Technologies of specific interest are: 

- Smart inflatable structures with embedded actuators and sensors for 
controlling structural geometry and dynamics.  
- Innovative methods for shape control of large membrane mirrors and antennas 
such as non-contact actuators.  
- Concepts and components for active, adaptive wavefront control systems with 
correction to < 1 wavelength.  
- Materials with controllable surface properties that could adapt to changing 
environmental conditions or mission needs.  
- Novel concepts for gossamer spacecraft that could enable missions that were 
previously considered impossible, while keeping cost and risk within acceptable 
limits.  An example concept is a gossamer spacecraft capable of modifying its 
shape or other functional characteristics so that it can adapt to different 
mission phases, such as atmospheric entry, descent, landing, and surface 
exploration.  

28.03 Electrostatic Control and Measurement Technologies 
Lead Center: KSC  
Participating Center(s): LaRC 

The development and use of solid state technologies has resulted in increased 
awareness and concern for the potential damage and costs due to uncontrolled 
electrostatic discharges (ESD) into electronic circuits and components.  Within 
NASA, hazardous operations involving toxic and explosive vapors, and solid 
propellants as well as operating electronic components in space and 
extraterrestrial environments have created special concerns for understanding 
the nature of surface charging, charge transport and the likelihood of discharge 
or arcing due to the electrostatic properties of the myriad of materials used 
during the fabrication, processing, launch and operation of unique and expensive 
space flight and vehicle elements.  Concerns for spacecraft also include 
charging due to corona and plasma and the effects of atomic oxygen.  New and 
innovative methods of measuring the electrostatic charging properties of new and 
existing materials including polymer films, foam insulation, etc. are important 
safety areas of interest to NASA.  In addition, finding temporary and/or 
permanent means to manage or mitigate the static charge buildup on material 
surfaces is another important area for improving the safety associated with 
hazardous operations and for application to the next generation of space 
vehicles.  Specific interests for the 2000 solicitation include, but are not 
limited to, those listed below: 

- Develop improved triboelectric charge measurement and decay test devices that 
will become part of new testing standards for protective clothing and other 
materials to be used in space, extraterrestrial and hazardous environments.  
Performance of the devices should be compared to similar data already collected 
by the Kennedy Space Center using existing technology.  Proposals should focus 
on electric field detection equipment, digital scope electronics, air/gas 
ionization and motorized devices.  Instruments and devices proposed for 
demonstration should be light weight, small in size, and suitable for operation 
in a vacuum with temperature ranges from - 160 C (- 250 F) to 200 C (400 F), in 
various gaseous environments with pressures from 100 millitorr to 5000 torr and 
temperatures from -160 C (- 250 F) to 200 C (400 F) as well as terrestrial 
environments with temperatures from - 75 C (-100 F) to 65 C (150 F) and humidity 
from 10 percent to 100 percent.  New concepts should give consideration to 
computer hardware and software to maximize capabilities to induce, detect, 
acquire, and record electric fields on material samples while plotting wave-
forms in volts versus time.  
- Development of miniature sensors for detecting and measuring spacecraft and 
landers electric potential and charge distribution.  Developing software for 
modeling spacecraft and landers electric potentials based on previous flight 
experiment data and models.  
- Improved anti-static coatings for application on various fabrics and polymer 
films as well as Propellant Handling Ensembles (PHE) suits.  Proposals should 
utilize new concepts, current technologies, as well as EPA approved 
materials/chemicals to meet or exceed usage in 30 percent relative humidity and 
providing the safest controlled environment for life support personnel.  The 
coating should have desirable properties which include a permanently smooth dry 
surface with sufficient durability to resist normal washing and other handling 
considerations.  Proposals should focus on cost benefit analysis per 
application.  
- Develop new materials that are inherently anti-static and/or anti-static 
coatings or static elimination/mitigation techniques for use on materials 
exposed to a vacuum or non-terrestrial gaseous environments with a wide range of 
temperatures and pressures equivalent to the requirements listed for test 
devices above.  New materials should also enhance thermal control, be resistant 
to the effects of atomic oxygen and mitigate environmental effects on both 
spacecraft and landers.  Develop techniques for grounding or charge elimination 
from spacecraft and landers including materials and concepts for shielding from 
charged particle radiation.  Develop new concepts for solar arrays and power 
systems immune to plasma interactions and plasma contacting devices.  Improved 
methods and processes should be developed to reduce the cost of current space 
qualified materials and coatings.  
- Develop cost effective methods for ground based simulation of the environments 
of low earth orbit space, deep space and planetary surfaces.  
- Develop techniques for measurement of the speed, charge and weight, either 
simultaneously or individually, of fine particles (less than 40 micron) under 
vacuum, atmospheric and/or other gas composition conditions over a broad range 
of temperatures and pressures.  These techniques must be capable of supporting 
future development of electrostatic charge and discharge (ESD) characterization 
of materials during exposure to dust impingement in a vacuum, atmospheric and 
non-terrestrial atmospheric environments.  

29 Atmospheric and In-Space Systems 

The Atmospheric and In-Space Systems (AISS) Cross Enterprise concentrates on 
systems that operate in space and within planetary atmospheres.  AISS is 
chartered to identify and develop fundamental technologies for this purpose.  
AISS develops aero-maneuvering technologies to descend into hostile planetary 
environments--aeroshells, balloon-assisted deployment which autonomously avoids 
the hazards of landing.  AISS develops systems that decend and record the 
landscape--balloons, ballutes, rotorcraft; systems that dock with similar 
spacecraft; systems with the ability to return samples, or find their way back 
to base camp without human intervention.  AISS also develops robotics to collect 
and catalog data on the planet environment.  Technologies are sought that will 
improve the performances, efficiencies, and safety for operations in the 
Atmospheric Systems and In-space Operations (ascent, descent, docking, 
maneuvering).  Of particular interest are Aero-maeuvering (ascent, entry and 
descent systems including aero-shell, hazard avoidance, balloon assisted 
deployment & ascent systems); Aerial systems (balloons, airplanes, rotocrafts, & 
gliders) and Operations (Rendezvous, docking and sample transfers systems).  

29.01 Automated Rendezvous and Docking 
Lead Center: JSC  
Participating Center(s): none 

In support of future robotic and human missions to Mars the need for automated 
rendezvous and docking has been identified.  

Automated Proximity Operations.  A key facet of this effort will involve the 
development, testing, and validation of a guidance, navigation, and control 
(GN&C) package to support final rendezvous and docking operations.  When ranges 
between a chaser vehicle and target vehicle decrease to less than a few 
kilometers, the trajectory control needs include not only accounting for the 
affects of orbital mechanics, but now much more frequent control of the 
trajectory through numerous thruster firings is required.  Whereas earlier in 
the rendezvous mission profile, maneuvers occurred perhaps every few days or 
hours, now manuever spacing will decrease to minutes or seconds.  Additionally, 
spacecraft attitudes must be managed during the last 100 meters or so of the 
approach to support alignment and final docking needs.  

Proposals are sought to develop guidance, navigation, and control software 
algorithms to support nominal and off-nominal conditions.  Operational 
trajectory flight corridors should be identified and trajectory control 
methodologies should be formulated to fly these corridors and achieve a very 
high level of mission success.  Contingency abort paths and recovery options 
should be developed.  The primary emphasis will be on the development of 
guidance algorithms for nearly continuous control of the trajectory which offer 
approach and docking in a highly efficient (low propellant cost) manner.  

Long Range Relative Navigation Sensor.  Another key facet of this effort will 
involve the development, testing, and validation of a navigation sensor capable 
of detecting a passive but cooperative target at ranges from 50-100 km down 
through docking.  The target can be considered to be passive in that it will not 
necessarily participate in active transponding with the chaser vehicle, and in 
fact, may be completely unpowered.  However, it is cooperative in that the 
target spacecraft may contain reflective devices specifically designed to 
accommodate this long range sensor development activity.  Specific accuracies 
for this sensor will be identified in the study, but will be on the order of 1 
percent of the range.  The sensor will need to provide range, range rate, and 
bearing information to the target.  The sensor must be developed for "can't 
fail" mission critical scenarios.  Additionally, because this sensor may be 
mounted to small spacecraft in orbit around the Moon or Mars, it must be capable 
of successful operations in these remote environments.  

Planetary Navigation Sensor.  A third key facet of this effort may involve the 
development, testing, and validation of a navigation sensor capable of 
determining where the spacecraft is in space around a remote astronomical body 
(e.g., Moon, Mars) utilizing in situ information, such as surface features on 
the astronomical body.  With this sensor, a spacecraft launching from the 
surface of that body can achieve orbit and then self-determine its orbit 
accurately with little to no assistance from Earth.  This "planetary nav sensor" 
must be sufficiently accurate, with supporting software, to navigate the 
spacecraft to within range of a long-range relative navigation sensor (as 
specified above).  




CHECK LIST


For assistance in completing your proposal, use the following checklist to 
ensure your submission is complete.

1. The entire proposal including any supplemental material shall not exceed a 
total of 25 8.5 x 11 inch pages, (Section 3.2.1).

2. The proposal and innovation is submitted for one subtopic only.  (Section 
3.1).

3. The entire proposal is submitted consistent with the requirements and in the 
order outlined in Section 3.2

4. The technical proposal contains all eleven parts in order.  (Section 3.2.4).  

5. Certifications in Form 9A are completed.

6. Proposed funding does not exceed $70,000.  (Sections 1.4.1, 5.1.1).

7. Proposed project duration should not exceed 6 months.  (Sections 1.4.1, 
5.1.1).

8. Printed version of Forms 9A, 9B and 9C included in the postal submission.  

9. Postal submission includes an original signed proposal with all forms plus 
three copies (Section 6.3).

10. Entire proposal including Forms 9A, 9B and 9C submitted via the internet.

11. Internet submission must be consistent with Postal submissions.  

12. Proposals must be received by the NASA SBIR/STTR Program Support Office no 
later than 5:00 p.m. EDT on Friday, July 14, 2000.  (Section 6.3.3).  

 

